## The Body Hunters: How the Drug Industry Tests Its Products on the World \_ s Poorest Patients . By Sonia Shah.

New York: The New Press, 2006, 242 pp., $24.95 (hardcover) .

The story of how Purdue Pharma in the United States vigorously promoted OxyContin as a safer analgesic alternative because of its time-release formulation, all the while knowing that its own scientific data showed otherwise, recently made the front page of the business section in the International Herald Tribune . Hardly a week goes by without a news story focused on possible subterfuge or an ethically questionably practice undertaken by a pharmaceutical company. The Body Hunters is yet another journalistic accounting of various purported sins of the pharmaceutical industry; this one is directed at the application of clinical trials in the B developing world, [ predominantly in Africa.

Unfortunately, unlike the well-researched and carefully crafted stories found in the New York Times or the International Herald Tribune , this tome often comes across as a polemic, hard on affect and soft on details, and thus it falls well short of the story that could have been written. We know that drug companies sometimes do B bad [ in the developing world. However, as medical practitioners, scientists, policymakers, investors, and the general public alike, we want to go beyond the knowing to understanding. We want to fix existing problems and establish mechanisms to try and prevent future inappropriate practices. In short, as the pharmaceutical Lexus confronts the African olive tree (to mangle a phrase from Thomas Friedman), what is happening, what can we learn, and what can be done?

Vague conspiracy theories dressed up as investigative journalism do not provide us with the opportunity to grapple with these complex issues. Reading The Body Hunters leaves me with a vague feeling of unease that the author \_ s polemic has hidden a more interesting, complex, and challenging story. More on that later V first, let \_ s deal with the issue of corporate social responsibility and the developing world.

The developing world is complex. It is made up of a bewildering array of social, cultural, religious, economic, and political organizations. It is challenged with extremes of wealth for the few and severe poverty for the many. It is historically complicated, shaped by powerful forces originating both far away and close to home. It is made up of successfully governed regions where the welfare of citizens is increasingly being seen as an outcome for governance and, concurrently, failed or failing states where the basic need for safety from predatory neighbors cannot be ensured. It is composed of a polyglot of philosophical and economic traditions and perspectives, many of which are far removed from Western ideas of the rule of law, liberal democracy, gender equality, separation of church and state, and so forth.

Into this complicated mix enters the large, wealthy, and (usually but not exclusively Western) corporation, which, according to its critics, seems to be driven primarily by a reckless indifference to everything but its balance sheet. Its impact can be immense. Its impact, we argue, should be for the common good, not only for its profit pages. In the developing world, as history and current practice have shown us, this impact is and has been frequently antithetical to the very values that are considered to be the basis on which we try to build and manage our common wealth.

The pharmaceutical industry \_ s narrow interests and lack of proactive participation in enhancing the social capital of the developing world has been displayed shamefully in the story of the denial of antiretroviral medications to nations and individuals who could not afford them, even in the face of one of the most devastating pandemics in recorded history. The AIDS story, well known to us all, has demonstrated that the primary motive of the industry may be simple V extreme profit over improvement of the human condition. Indeed, this story has not been concluded. Some large international pharmaceutical companies still continue to act in a manner that many cannot condone. Evidence the current conflict between Abbott Laboratories and the government of Thailand about medication patents held by Abbott (which they have legal rights to) and B copycat [ production legislated by the government (which they have every legal right to do).

This issue is even more complex than the legal and moral arguments swirling around it, however, because the pharmaceutical industry is not a single entity. Just as Abbott is threatening Thailand, so too Gilead Sciences is apparently granting license to generic companies to manufacture a new HIV drug, which will be provided to low-income countries at substantial savings. Bristol-Myers Squibb has been reported as licensing one of its HIV drugs free of royalties for generic manufacture and distribution to parts of India and Africa. Actually, it may be possible to realize profit and concurrently improve the human condition; these are not, by definition, mutually exclusive activities.

What is the responsibility of the corporate world to the human fabric and social well-being of the developing world? In its endorsement of then Secretary General Kofi Annan \_ s Global Compact (2004), the General Assembly of the United Nations endorsed 10 principles designed to help clarify this

issue and to protect human rights in vulnerable peoples and resource-constrained environments. The international courts have considered the application of their mandates to extraterritorial measures in which the abrogation of these principles may be cause for prosecution. But there remain few, if any, substantial compliance requirements or enforcement procedures. The irony of this is that the very states that have endorsed the United Nations principles have done little to ensure their application.

Thus, the issue of corporate responsibility is not as simple as it first seems. Many actors with different agendas, powers, and interests are at work. Simple morality plays that focus only on one party miss the complexity of this issue. Sonia Shah has written a morality play, a high road polemic based on affect and a few illustrative stories. Although the cause is clear, the understanding of the complexities is muddy. As a result, The Body Hunters belongs more in the high melodrama category than in the thoughtful read category. Nonetheless, it sounds a note of alarm and challenges us to act. The problem is that in the absence of understanding, action may turn out to be ineffective.

This book is a good beginning. It challenges us to look at the wider world and tells a story that cannot be ignored. Whether details are correct, whether the author has cleverly mixed opinion with fact and thus created individual guilt by implication, and whether the author has B cherry picked [ worst cases to write a story are all questions that, although important, do not take away from the troubling alarm sounded in the pages of this book.

Now that our affect has been tweaked, it is time for our collective cerebral cortexes to be engaged. I would like to read a book that follows on from this expose ´. What would I like to see in that volume? How about the following:

- More evidence of the problem V given the possibly hundreds of clinical trials occurring in countries outside the West V how representative of reality are the cases described by the author, are these isolated examples or just the tip of the iceberg?
- Thoughtful analysis of the complexities of the problem, for example: What is the responsibility of governments in the countries where these trials are taking place, what is the responsibility of regulatory bodies who accept the data from these trials, what is the responsibility of international organizations such as the World Medical Association or the United Nations or the World Trade Organization, what is the responsibility of the scientific journal editors who decide which studies get published in the peer-reviewed literature, what is the responsibility of the investigator who participates in these studies?
- A more nuanced understanding of ethical complexities: What is the relationship between ethical models governing

J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 47:1, JANUARY 2008

clinical research developed in Western countries and the ethical models at play operating in non-Western countries? How should ethical standards best be translated or addressed in non-Western countries? What are the perspectives of Western ethicists on these issues and how do they compare to the perspectives of ethicists or religious leaders from non-Western countries?

As a scientist, clinician, policy advisor, educator, and global citizen, I for one look forward to learning and understanding more about this important issue. I would like to act, but would like to act wisely.

## Stan Kutcher, M.D., F.R.C.P.C.

Dalhousie University Halifax, NS, Canada stan.kutcher@dal.ca 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815af9ce

Disclosure: The author reports no conflicts of interest.

The Body Hunters: How the Drug Industry Tests Its Products on the World \_ s Poorest Patients . By Sonia Shah. New York: The New Press, 2006, 242 pp., $24.95 (hardcover).

The Body Hunters is an in-depth expose ´ of pharmaceutical corporations and the methods by which they use human subjects to obtain the scientific data necessary to gain regulatory approval for their products. Sonia Shah, an experienced investigative reporter, presents a case against large pharmaceutical corporations for their alleged exploitation of human subjects from impoverished, developing countries.

The provocative title, The Body Hunters , is a prelude to the riveting content in this book; it is a definite page-turner. There is no subtlety to the author \_ s view. Shah takes aim at the pharmaceutical industry with a sledgehammer. Her dramatic style, almost a book version of the recent film, The Constant Gardener , makes for an entertaining documentary. Like the movie, this work is heavily biased against both the pharmaceutical industry and its clinical researchers who design and conduct studies. Shah has thoroughly documented her work; each chapter is heavily footnoted with as many as 100 citations.

Shah questions the ethics of multinational pharmaceutical corporations \_ use of vulnerable populations in clinical research. She finds much to criticize in the approach to human subjects used in recent third world drug trials. She documents the shift of the clinical research enterprise to developing nations to escape the increasing challenge posed by the more stringent regulatory environment in the West. Shah finds this practice to be exploitive and unjust. She discounts