Correspondence to S.V.F. e-mail: sfaraone@ childpsychresearch.org Departments of Psychiatry Physiology, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA; K.G. Jebsen Centre for Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, 5020 Bergen, Norway.

Article number: 15020 doi:10.1038/nrdp.2015.20 Published online 6 August 2015

<!-- image -->

## PRIMER

## Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

Stephen V. Faraone 1,2 , Philip Asherson 3 , T obias Banaschewski 4 , Joseph Biederman 5 , Jan K. Buitelaar 6 , Josep Antoni Ramos-Quiroga 7-9 , Luis Augusto Rohde 10,11 , Edmund J. S. Sonuga-Barke 12,13 , Rosemary Tannock 14,15  and Barbara Franke 16

Abstract | Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent neurodevelopmental disorder that affects 5% of children and adolescents and 2.5% of adults worldwide. Throughout an individual's lifetime, ADHD can increase the risk of other psychiatric disorders, educational and occupational failure, accidents, criminality, social disability and addictions. No single risk factor is necessary or sufficient to cause ADHD. In most cases ADHD arises from several genetic and environmental risk factors that each have a small individual effect and act together to increase susceptibility. The multifactorial causation of ADHD is consistent with the heterogeneity of the disorder, which is shown by its extensive psychiatric co-morbidity, its multiple domains of neurocognitive impairment and the wide range of structural and functional brain anomalies associated with it. The diagnosis of ADHD is reliable and valid when evaluated with standard criteria for psychiatric disorders. Rating scales and clinical interviews facilitate diagnosis and aid screening. The expression of symptoms varies as a function of patient developmental stage and social and academic contexts. Although there are no curative treatments for ADHD, evidenced-based treatments can markedly reduce its symptoms and associated impairments. For example, medications are efficacious and normally well tolerated, and various non-pharmacological approaches are also valuable. Ongoing clinical and neurobiological research holds the promise of advancing diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to ADHD. For an illustrated summary of this Primer, visit: http://go.nature.com/J6jiwl

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; also known as hyperkinetic disorder) is a common disorder characterized by inattention or hyperactivityimpulsivity, or both. The evidence base for the diagnosis and treatment of ADHD has been growing exponentially since the syndrome was first described by a German physician in 1775 (REF. 1) (FIG. 1) . In 1937, the efficacy of amphetamine use to reduce symptom severity was serendipitously discovered. In the 1940s, the brain was implicated as the source of ADHD-like symptoms, which were described as minimal brain damage in the wake of an encephalitis epidemic. In 1980, the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) created the first reliable operational diagnostic criteria for the disorder. These criteria initiated many programmes of research that ultimately led the scientific community to view ADHD as a seriously impairing, often persistent neurobiological disorder of high prevalence that is caused by a complex interplay between genetic and environmental risk factors. These risk factors affect the structural and functional capacity of brain networks and lead to ADHD symptoms, neurocognitive deficits and a wide range of functional impairments.

We now have many large and well-designed epidemiological, clinical and longitudinal studies that have clarified the features, co-morbidities and impairments associated with ADHD. These studies have created reliable and valid measurement tools for screening, diagnosis and monitoring of treatment. Likewise, rigorous clinical trials have documented the safety and efficacy of ADHD treatment, and it is now clear which ADHD treatments work, which do not and which require further study. In this Primer, we discuss the evidence base that has created a firm foundation for future work to further clarify the aetiology and pathophysiology of ADHD and to advance diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to this disorder.

## Epidemiology

## Age-dependent prevalence of ADHD

ADHD is a common disorder among young people worldwide. In 2007, a meta-analysis of more than 100 studies estimated the worldwide prevalence of ADHD in children and adolescents to be 5.3% (95% CI: 5.01-5.56) 2 . Three methodological factors explained this variability among studies: the choice of diagnostic criteria, the source of information used and the inclusion of a requirement for functional impairment as well as symptoms for diagnosis. After adjusting for these factors, a subsequent meta-analysis concluded that the prevalence of ADHD does not significantly differ between countries in Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas, as well as in Australia 3 . Although other meta-analyses have found either lower or

## Author addresses

1 Departments of Psychiatry and of Neuroscience and Physiology, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA. 2 K.G. Jebsen Centre for Psychiatric Disorders, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, 5020 Bergen, Norway.

3 Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.

4 Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.

5 Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital,

Pediatric Psychopharmacology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

6 Radboud University Medical Center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience and Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry University Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

7 ADHD Program, Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

8 Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain.

9 Department of Psychiatry and Legal Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

10 ADHD Outpatient Program, Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Department of Psychiatry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

11 National Institute of Developmental Psychiatry for Children and Adolescents,

Sao Paulo, Brazil.

12 Department of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

13 Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

14 Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Program, Research Institute of The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.

15 Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

16 Radboud University Medical Center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and

Behaviour, Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

higher prevalence rates, these presented important limitations, such as the exclusive use of DSM criteria to diagnose ADHD and the use of simulated prevalence rates 4,5 . In addition, there is no evidence, worldwide, of an increase in the real prevalence of ADHD over the past three decades 3 . Despite the fact that both overdiagnosis and underdiagnosis are common concerns in medicine, the common public perception that ADHD is o  verdiagnosed in the United States might not be warranted 6 .

ADHD also affects adults. Although the majority of children with ADHD will not continue to meet the full set of criteria for ADHD as adults, the persistence of either functional impairment 7 or subthreshold (three or fewer) impairing symptoms into adulthood is high 8 . For instance, on the basis of a meta-analysis of six studies, Simon and colleagues 9 found the pooled prevalence of ADHD to be 2.5% (95% CI: 2.1-3.1) in adults. In addition, studies in older adults have found prevalence rates in the same range 10,11 , and prospective longitudinal studies support the notion that approximately two-thirds of youths with ADHD retain impairing symptoms of the disorder in adulthood 7 (FIG. 2) .

Recent alterations to diagnostic criteria have had an impact on ADHD prevalence measures in both young and adult populations. In 2013, DSM-5 (REF. 12) included three important changes: first, increasing the age of onset from 7 years to 12 years; second, decreasing the symptom threshold for patients ≥17 years of age from six to five symptoms; and third, enabling ADHD to be diagnosed in the presence of an autism spectrum disorder. The third change is consistent with the reconceptualization of ADHD in DSM-5 as a neurodevelopmental disorder rather than a disruptive behavioural disorder. Overall, these new criteria have yielded an increase in ADHD prevalence, which is insubstantial for children but is likely to have had a more considerable effect on diagnosis rates in adults 13,14 .

## Sociodemographic factors

Alongside age, other factors such as sex, ethnicity and socioeconomic status are also important when considering the prevalence of ADHD. In children and adolescents, ADHD predominantly affects males and exhibits a maleto-female sex ratio of 4:1 in clinical studies and 2.4:1 in population studies 2 . In adulthood, this sex discrepancy almost disappears 14 , possibly owing to referral biases among treatment-seeking patients or to sex-specifi  c effects of ADHD over the course of the disorder.

Larsson and colleagues 15 found that low family income predicted an increased likelihood of ADHD in a Swedish population-based cohort study of 811,803 indivi  duals. However, this finding does not necessarily support the conclusion that socioeconomic s  tatus increases the risk of ADHD because the disorder runs in families and leads to educational and occupational underattainment. Underemployment could in turn lead to the over-representation of socioeconomic d  isadvantage among families affected by ADHD 16 .

Finally, although the true prevalence of ADHD does not vary with ethnicity, some studies have inconsistently associated ethnicity with ADHD owing to referral patterns and barriers to care that disproportionately affect particular ethnic groups 17-19 .

## Mechanisms/pathophysiology

## Genes and environment

Genetic epidemiology. ADHD runs in families, with parents and siblings of patients with ADHD showing between a fivefold and tenfold increased risk of develop  ing the disorder compared with the general population 20,21 . Twin studies show that ADHD has a heritability of 70-80% in both children and adults 22-25 , with little or no evidence that the effects of environmental risk factors shared by siblings substantially influence aetiology 26 . Environmental risk factors play their greatest part in the non-shared familial environment and/or act through interactions with genes and DNA variants that regulate gene expression - such as those in promoters, u  ntranslated regions of genes or loci that encode microRNAs.

Although ADHD is a categorical diagnosis, results from twin studies suggest that it is the extreme and impairing tail of one or more heritable quantitative traits 27 . The disorder is influenced by both stable genetic factors and those that emerge at different developmental stages from childhood through to adulthood 28 . Thus, genes contribute to the onset, persistence and remission of ADHD, presumably through stable neurobiological deficits as well as maturational or compensatory processes that

Figure 1 | The history of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 'syndromes' have been described in the medical literature since the eighteenth century, but the growth of systematic research required the development of operational diagnostic criteria in the late twentieth century. This schematic outlines selected important developments in the history of ADHD research. CBT, cognitive-behavioural therapy; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

influence development. The inattention and hyperactivity or impulsivity that characterize ADHD are separate domains of psychopathology, with a genetic corre  lation of around 0.6, reflecting substantial genetic overlap but also genetic influences that are domain specific 29 . Shared genetic factors also account for the co-occurrence of ADHD with emotional d  ysregulation - an independent source of impairment in ADHD 30,31 . Family and twin studies have also demonstrated that genetic influences are shared between ADHD and a wide range of other neurodevelopmental and psycho  pathological traits and disorders, including conduct disorder and problems 32 , cognitive performance 33 , autism s  pectrum disorders 34 and mood disorders 35,36 .

Molecular genetics. On the basis of data from genomewide association studies (GWAS), approximately 40% of the heritability of ADHD can be attributed to numerous common genetic variants 37 . In polygenic risk score analy  sis, the genetic signals attributed to common variants derived from a discovery sample are used to predict phenotypic effects in a second sample. The polygenic risk for clinically diagnosed ADHD predicts ADHD symptoms in the population more broadly 38 , confirming the conclusion from twin studies that the genes determining the diagnosis of ADHD also regulate the expression of subclinical levels of ADHD symptoms. In addition, these analyses have confirmed earlier evidence from family and twin studies that found significant co-aggregation of ADHD with depression 37 , conduct problems 39 and schizophrenia 40 .  Furthermore, combined GWAS of ADHD, autism spectrum disorders, depression, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia identified four genome-wide significant loci shared by these disorders 37 .

In addition to the common-variant studies, rare (prevalence of &lt;1%) genomic insertions and deletions known as copy number variants (CNVs) have a role in ADHD 41,42 . One study found that 15.6% of patients with ADHD carry large CNVs of &gt;500,000 base pairs in length compared with 7.5% of individuals without the disorder. The rate of large CNV carriage was even higher (42.4%) in those with both ADHD and an IQ below 70 ± 5 (which, along with poor adaptive functioning, defines intellectual disability) 42 . These findings have been replicated 43 , and together these studies implicate genes at 16p13.11 along with the 15q11-15q13 region in ADHD. The 15q11-15q13 region contains the gene that encodes the nicotinic α7 acetylcholine receptor subunit, which participates in neuronal and nicotinic signalling pathways. Finally, ADHD-associated CNVs also span several glutamate receptor genes, which are essential for neuronal glutamatergic transmission 44 , and the gene encoding neuropeptide Y, which is involved in signalling in the brain and autonomic nervous system 45 . CNVs associated with ADHD also occur in s chizophrenia and autism 42 .

Figure 2 | The age-dependent decline and persistence of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder throughout the lifetime. Follow-up studies have assessed children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) at multiple time points after their initial diagnosis. Although they document an age-dependent decline in ADHD symptoms, ADHD is also a highly persistent disorder when defined by the persistence of functional impairment 7 or the persistence of subthreshold (three or fewer) impairing symptoms 8 . By contrast, many patients remit full diagnostic criteria 7 . Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

Although GWAS that investigated common genetic variants (FIG. 3) have not identified specific ADHD genes at genome-wide levels of significance 46 , intriguing results have emerged from meta-analyses of studies of candidate genes involved in the monoamine neurotransmitter systems 47 . These systems had been implicated in the pathophysiology of ADHD by the mechanisms of action of drugs used in clinical management. Methylphenidate and amphetamine target the sodium-dependent dopamine transporter (encoded by SLC6A3 ), atomoxetine targets the sodium-dependent noradrenaline transporter, and both extended-release guanfacine and extended-release clonidine target the α2A-adrenergic receptor. Within the monoamine systems, the strongest evidence of ADHD association is for variants in the genes encoding the D4 and D1B dopamine receptors 47 . The association of the SLC6A3 gene variant is equivocal 47 , possibly owing to age-related effects 48 . Other genes that show possible associations with ADHD include SLC6A4 (which encodes the sodium-dependent serotonin transporter), HTR1B (which encodes 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1B ( also known as serotonin receptor 1B)) and SNAP25 (which encodes synaptosomal-associated protein 25) 47 . Owing to methodological issues, a cautious approach must be taken to the interpretation of candidate gene studies. Nevertheless, the role of the dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin and neurite outgrowth systems is supported by genome-wide association studybased gene-set analyses reporting that, as a group, genes regulating these systems were associated with ADHD and hyperactivity or impulsivity 46,49,50 .

Environmental risk factors. Identifying e  nvironmental causes of ADHD is difficult because environmental associations might arise from other sources, such as from child or parental behaviours that shape the environ  ment, or they might reflect unmeasured third variables. For example, children with ADHD might evoke 'hostile' styles of parenting, and genes linked to ADHD might explain the association of parental variables, such as maternal smoking during pregnancy, with offspring who have ADHD 51,52 . One notable study investigated maternal hostility while controlling for genetic effects by studying children adopted at birth and children conceived through in vitro fertilization and their genetically unrelated rearing m  others 53 . The study found a role for genetically influenced early child behaviour on the hostility of biologically unrelated mothers, which in turn was a predictor of subsequent ADHD symptoms developed by the children. Another study followed Romanian adoptees who had experienced severe early maternal deprivation in orphanages before adoption. It showed a dose-  dependent relationship between length of deprivation and risk of developing ADHD-like symptoms 54 . Other environmental risk factors that have been associated with ADHD include prenatal and perinatal factors, such as maternal smoking and alcohol use, low birth weight, premature birth and exposure to environmental toxins, such as organophosphate pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, zinc and lead 55,56 .  Animal models have also contributed much to the study of environmental risk factors 57-59 . Similar to genetic risk factors, the effects of any one environ  mental risk factor are small and could reflect either small effects in many cases or larger effects in a few cases. Furthermore, rather than being specific to ADHD, these environmental risk factors are associated with several psychiatric disorders 29 .

In addition to the main effects of the environment, the high heritability of ADHD suggests that geneenvironment (G × E) interactions might be the main mechanism by which environmental risk factors increase the risk of ADHD. For example, a variant of 5-HTTLPR -a polymorphic region located in the promoter of SLC6A4 - is involved in the hyperactivity and impulsivity dimensions of ADHD in interaction with stress 60 . Although some early studies identified other G × E effects, none has been reliably reproduced. Future success in this area requires the use of large data sets, such as those emerging from the use of national databases in Denmark and Sweden, which can combine large-scale genetic studies with recorded data on exposure to environmental risks.

Another approach to identify environmental risk factors in ADHD is to focus on the detection of epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation, which are reversible changes in genomic function that are independent of DNA sequence. Epigenetics provides a mechanism by which environmental risk factors alter gene function. However, as epigenetic changes are highly tissue specific, they are difficult to study in ADHD because of limited access to brain tissue. Studies must, therefore, rely on peripheral tissues such as blood, the epigenetic profile of which partly overlaps with that of brain tissue. Environmental toxins and stress can all induce epigenetic changes, thus the identification of genes that show epigenetic changes linked to ADHD, or in response to environmental risk factors, might in the future provide new insights into the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of ADHD 61 .

## Brain mechanisms

Cognition. ADHD is characterized by deficits in multiple, relatively independent, cognitive domains. Executive functioning deficits are seen in visuospatial and verbal working memory, inhibitory control, vigilance and planning 62,63 . Studies of reward dysregulation show that patients with ADHD make suboptimal decisions 64 , prefer immediate rather than delayed rewards 65 and overestimate the magnitude of proximal relative to distal rewards 66 . Other domains impaired in ADHD include temporal information processing and timing 67 ; speech and language 68 ; memory span, processing speed and response time variability 69 ; arousal and activation 70 ; and motor control 71 .  Although most patients with ADHD show deficits in one or two cognitive domains, some have no deficits and very few show deficits in all domains 72 . In addition, across the lifespan of patients with ADHD, deficits in cognitive control, reward sensitivity and timing have been shown to be independent of one another 73 , and it is currently unclear whether cognitive deficits cause ADHD symptoms and drive the development of the clinical phenotype 72  or reflect the pleiotropic o  utcomes of risk factors.

Structural and functional brain imaging. Several brain regions and neural pathways have been implicated in ADHD (FIG. 4) . Functional MRI studies in patients with ADHD that used inhibitory control, working memory and attentional tasks have shown underactivation of frontostriatal, frontoparietal and ventral attention networks 74 . The frontoparietal network mediates goal-directed executive processes, whereas the ventral attention network facilitates reorientation of attention towards salient and behaviourally relevant external stimuli. In rewardprocessing paradigms, most studies report lower activation of the ventral striatum of patients with ADHD in

Figure 3 | Genetics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Common variants explain approximately 40% of the heritability of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder but, compared with rarer causes, individual common variants have much smaller effects on the expression of the disorder. Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

anticipation of reward than in controls 75 . ADHD is also associated with hyperactivation in somatomotor and visual systems 74 , which possibly compensates for impaired functioning of the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices 76 . A single dose of methylphenidate (a stimulant) markedly enhances activation in the inferior frontal cortex and insula bilaterally - which are key areas of cognitive control - during inhibition and time discrimination but does not affect working memory networks 77 . By contrast, long-term treatment with stimulants is associated with normal activation in the right caudate nucleus during the performance of attention tasks 78 . Resting-state MRI studies have shown that ADHD is associated with less-pronounced or absent anti-correlations between the default-mode network (DMN) and the cognitive control network, lower connectivity within the DMN itself and lower connectivity within the cognitive and m  otivational loops of the frontostriatal circuits 79 .

Along with functional changes, a range of structural brain alterations are also associated with ADHD. For example, ADHD is associated with a 3-5% smaller total brain size than unaffected controls 80,81 that can be attributed to a reduction of grey matter 82 . Consistent with genetic data that support a model of ADHD as the extreme of a population trait, total brain volume correlates negatively with ADHD symptoms in the general population 83 . In patients with ADHD, meta-analyses have documented smaller volumes across several brain regions, most consistently in the right globus pallidus, right putamen, caudate nucleus and cerebellum 84,85 . In addition, a meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging studies showed widespread alterations in white matter integrity, especially in the right anterior corona radiata, right forceps minor, bilateral internal capsule and left cerebellum 86 . Both structural and functional imaging findings are very variable across studies, suggesting that the neural underpinnings of ADHD are heterogeneous, which is consistent with studies of cognition.

Just as the prevalence of ADHD is associated with age (FIG. 2) , so too are many changes in the brains of patients with ADHD 7 . Some brain volumetric alterations observed in childhood normalize with age 82,85 , whereas other m  easures remain fixed. For example, a longitudinal MRI study found lower basal ganglion volumes and reduced dorsal surface area in adolescents with ADHD compared with controls, and this difference did not change as patients aged 87 . Furthermore, for ventral striatal surfaces, control individuals showed surface area expansion with age, whereas patients with ADHD experienced a progressive contraction of the surface area. The as-yetunknown process underlying this contraction might explain abnormal processing of reward in ADHD 87 . ADHD is also associated with delayed maturation of the cerebral cortex. In one study, the age of attaining peak cortical thickness was 10.5 years for patients with ADHD and 7.5 years for unaffected individuals; this delay was most prominent in the prefrontal regions that are important for executive functioning, attention and motor planning 88 . The development of cortical surface area was also shown to be delayed in patients with ADHD, but ADHD was not associated with altered developmental

## PRIMER

Figure 4 | Brain mechanisms in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.  a | The cortical regions (lateral view) of the brain have a role in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is linked to working memory, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex to complex decision making and strategic planning, and the parietal cortex to orientation of attention. b | ADHD involves the subcortical structures (medial view) of the brain. The ventral anterior cingulate cortex and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex subserve affective and cognitive components of executive control. Together with the basal ganglia (comprising the nucleus accumbens, caudate nucleus and putamen), they form the frontostriatal circuit. Neuroimaging studies show structural and functional abnormalities in all of these structures in patients with ADHD, extending into the amygdala and cerebellum. c | Neurotransmitter circuits in the brain are involved in ADHD. The dopamine system plays an important part in planning and initiation of motor responses, activation, switching, reaction to novelty and processing of reward. The noradrenergic system influences arousal modulation, signal-to-noise ratios in cortical areas, state-dependent cognitive processes and cognitive preparation of urgent stimuli. d | Executive control networks are affected in patients with ADHD. The executive control and corticocerebellar networks coordinate executive functioning, that is, planning, goal-directed behaviour, inhibition, working memory and the flexible adaptation to context. These networks are underactivated and have lower internal functional connectivity in individuals with ADHD compared with individuals without the disorder. e | ADHD involves the reward network. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex and ventral striatum are at the centre of the brain network that responds to anticipation and receipt of reward. Other structures involved are the thalamus, the amygdala and the cell bodies of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, which, as indicated by the arrows, interact in a complex manner. Behavioural and neural responses to reward are abnormal in ADHD. f | The alerting network is impaired in ADHD. The frontal and parietal cortical areas and the thalamus intensively interact in the alerting network (indicated by the arrows), which supports attentional functioning and is weaker in individuals with ADHD than in controls. g | ADHD involves the default-mode network (DMN). The DMN consists of the medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior cingulate cortex (medial view) as well as the lateral parietal cortex and the medial temporal lobe (lateral view). DMN fluctuations are 180 degrees out of phase with fluctuations in networks that become activated during externally oriented tasks, presumably reflecting competition between opposing processes for processing resources. Negative correlations between the DMN and the frontoparietal control network are weaker in patients with ADHD than in people who do not have the disorder. Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

trajectories of cortical gyrification 89 . Remission of ADHD has been associated with normalization of abnormalities as measured by activation during functional imaging tasks 90 , cortical thinning 91 and structural and functional brain connectivity 92-95 .

Although these data could be taken to suggest that the age-dependent decline in the prevalence of ADHD might be due to the late development of ADHD-associated brain structures and functions, most patients with ADHD do not show complete developmental 'catch up' . Indeed, widespread deviations in cortical thickness persist in many adults with ADHD. Findings include both cortical thinning (in the superior frontal cortex, pre  central cortex, inferior and superior parietal cortex, temporal pole and medial temporal cortex) 89,96 and cortical thickening (in the pre-supplementary motor area, somatosensory cortex and occipital cortex) 97 . More work is needed to determine how develop  mental changes in patterns of corti  cal thickness predict d  evelopmental changes in ADHD symptom expression.

## Summary

Neurocognitive, neuroimaging and genetic theories of ADHD have shifted from single-cause or singlepathway models to models that delineate causes that lead to ADHD through several molecular, neural and neurocognitive pathways 33,98-102 . These approaches have received clear support from aetiological studies indicating that most cases of ADHD arise from a 'pool' of genetic and environmental risk factors. Most of these risk factors have only a small effect on causal pathways. Cumulative vulnerability increases ADHD trait scores, and our current model suggests that ADHD emerges when these exceed a certain threshold. In most cases, no single factor is necessary or sufficient to cause ADHD. However, in some patients, rare genetic variants 41,42 or environmental risk factors - for example, psychosocial d  eprivation 54 - might have a major influence.

The multifactorial causation of ADHD leads to a hetero  geneous profile of psychopathology, neurocognitive deficits and abnormalities in the structure and function of the brain. Many cases probably involve dysregulation of the structure and function of  the  frontal-  subcortical-  cerebellar  pathways that control attention, response to reward, salience thresholds, inhibitory control and motor behaviour. A meta-  analysis  of  peripheral  biomarkers  in  the blood and urine of drug-naive or drug-free patients with ADHD and unaffected individuals found several measures - specifically, noradrenaline, 3-methoxy-4hydroxyphenylethylene glycol (MHPG), monoamine oxidase (MAO) and cortisol - to be significantly associ  ated with ADHD 56 . Several of these metabolites were also related to response to ADHD medication and symptom severity of ADHD. These results support the idea that catecho  laminergic neurotransmitter systems (discussed in further detail in the following section) and the hypothalamic-  pituitary-adrenal axis are dysregulated in ADHD. Finally, genetic and clinical studies also implicate other systems, including the serotonergic, nicotinic, g  lutamatergic and neurite outgrowth systems.

## Diagnosis, screening and prevention

The diagnostic process for ADHD assesses the inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptom criteria for ADHD, evidence that symptoms cause functional impairments and age of onset before 12 years. Although ADHD is associated with other features such as executive dysfunction 62 and emotional dysregulation 31,103 , these are commonly observed in other disorders and are not core diagnostic criteria for ADHD 12 . To assist diagnosis, several open access assessment tools have been created for use in both children (TABLE 1) and adults (TABLE 2) , and excellent, well-normed (standardized) commercial scales are available 104 . Importantly, patient age is relevant when assessing standard diagnostic criteria, such as those of the DSM or the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), owing to changes in the expression of ADHD symptoms and impairments throughout an individual's lifetime (FIGS 2,5) .

## Children and adolescents

The diagnosis of ADHD relies on clinical symptoms reported by patients or informants (including relatives and teachers), which is standard for all psychiatric disorders 12 . National clinical guidelines and practice parameters for ADHD, developed over the past decade, show good consensus and the potential to enhance evidence-based clinical practice 105 . Diagnosis is based on information from a detailed clinical interview, which remains the 'gold standard' . Diagnosticians ask about each ADHD symptom, the age of onset and resultant functional impairments. A clinical interview aims to establish whether symptoms are more extreme, persistent and impairing than expected for the developmental level of the patient. Validated rating scales (TABLE 1) help with such decisions, as they enable informants to quanti  tatively rate the behaviour of the patient at home, at school and in the community.

Several factors present challenges to clinicians aiming to determine whether a diagnosis of ADHD is appropriate. For instance, cultural and ethnic differences can hinder diagnosis owing to variability in attitudes towards ADHD, willingness to report symptoms or the acceptance of the diagnosis. For example, a literature review suggested that African-American youths had more ADHD symptoms than Caucasian youths but were diagnosed with ADHD only two-thirds as often, possibly owing to parent beliefs about ADHD and the lack of treatment access and use 106 . In addition, patient age can be an issue. Developmental changes can internalize or modify some symptoms. For example, the hyper  activity of childhood might be experienced as inner restlessness in adolescence, and distractibility could manifest as distracting thoughts. Accordingly, self-reports from adolescents are useful, but patients can sometimes lack insight into their own difficulties. Furthermore, although younger children can provide useful information, especial  ly about internalizing symptoms 107 , parents remain the main source of information for this group of patients. Parents can report on symptoms during school recesses and vacations when teacher reports are not available. Although parent reports show good concurrent and predictive validity 108,109 , information from other informants such as teachers, when available, is valuable for documenting ADHD in other settings, for predicting prognosis and for increasing the confidence of diagnoses 110-112 . Finally, diagnosticians can also inquire about other medical conditions associated with symptoms of ADHD, such as seizure disorders, sleep disorders, hyperthyroidism, physical or sexual abuse and sensory i  mpairments 113 , as these can confound diagnosis.

Although screening for ADHD is theoretically feasible given the availability of parent and self-reported scales (TABLE 1) , the few studies that have investigated the use of early screening for ADHD have yielded inconsistent findings. For example, a 6-year longitudinal study suggested that a parent-rated questionnaire might help with early detection, prediction and treatment planning 114 . However, owing to a lack of accurate predictors of onset, attempts at early prevention of ADHD currently rely on population-level efforts to mitigate

the effects of environmental risk factors for the disorder. Primary prevention strategies optimize maternal health during pregnancy by reducing extreme stress and psycho  social adversity, eliminating smoking, alcohol and drug use and reducing risk factors for preterm birth and low birth weight. Secondary prevention approaches that detect symptoms of ADHD at an early stage for example at infancy or preschool age - include screening programmes in primary care, parent training programmes, and speci  fic games and play-based programmes to enhance self-regulation when symptoms are identified 115,116 .

## Adults

Over the past 40 years, clinical, family, treatment, longi  tudinal and population studies have generated

| Table 1 | Aselection of open access resources for assessing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in childhood   | Table 1 | Aselection of open access resources for assessing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in childhood                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Table 1 | Aselection of open access resources for assessing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in childhood                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Approach                                                                                                            | Comments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Websites                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Interviews                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Schedule for Affective Disordersand Schizophrenia in School AgeChildren (K-SADS)                                    | • Asemi-structured diagnostic interview • Evaluates past andcurrent psychopathology in childrenand adolescents, according to DSM-IVandDSM-IIIcriteria • Translationsinmanylanguages • ADSM-5versionis imminent                                                                                                                  | http://www.psychiatry.pitt.edu/node/8233                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISC)                                                                   | • Astructured diagnostic that uses DSM-IVtoassess psychopathology in children andadolescents • Translationsinmanylanguages                                                                                                                                                                                                      | http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/ limited_access/interviewer_manual.pdf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ChildandAdolescent PsychiatricAssessment (CAPA)                                                                     | • Asemi-structured interview that evaluates current psychopathology in children andadolescents • Based onDSM-IVcriteria • Versions for youths andpreschool-aged children • Spanish andPortuguese translations                                                                                                                   | https://devepi.duhs.duke.edu/capa.html https://devepi.duhs.duke.edu/pubs/ papachapter.pdf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Developmentand Well-BeingAssessment (DAWBA)                                                                         | • For clinicians andtrained non-clinicians • Usesaprespecifiedsetofquestionsandprobesforimpairment • Generally used togetherwiththeSDQ • Translationsinmanylanguages                                                                                                                                                            | http://www.dawba.com/b0.html                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Parent Interview for Child Symptoms(PICS)                                                                           | • Asemi-structured interview focused ondiagnostic criteriaforADHD, ODDandCDinchildrenandadolescents • Addresses symptomsofotherpsychiatric disorders • Has been updated for DSM-5criteria • IncludestheTTI,whichassessessymptomsofADHD,ODDandCDin school, with screening questions for other psychopathology • Dutchtranslation | http://www.sickkids.ca/MS-Office-Files/ Psychiatry/17145-Administration_Guidelines_ PICS6.pdf http://www.sickkids.ca/pdfs/Research/ Tannock/6013-TTI-IVManual.pdf                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| ChildADHD TTI (CHATTI)                                                                                              | • Astructured telephone interview for teachers • Focuses onDSM-IVcriteriaforADHDinschool • Only available in English                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Availablefromtheauthors 254                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Scales                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| VanderbiltADHD Diagnostic Rating Scales (VARS)                                                                      | • Versions for a parent or caregiver andteacher • PartoftheAmericanAcademyofPediatricsADHDToolkit • Spanish translation                                                                                                                                                                                                         | http://www.nichq.org/childrens-health/adhd/ resources/vanderbilt-assessment-scales                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Swanson,Nolanand Pelham (SNAP)-IV Rating Scale                                                                      | • AratingscaleforsymptomsofADHDandODD • Canbecompletedbyateacher,parentorcaregiver • Sensitive to changes related to treatment • Portuguese, Spanish andFrench translations                                                                                                                                                     | Short scale (26-item) available from: http://www. caddra.ca/pdfs/caddraGuidelines2011SNAP .pdf Scoring guidelines available from: http:// www.caddra.ca/pdfs/caddraGuidelines2011 SNAPInstructions.pdf Full scale (90-item) available from: http://www.adhd.net/snap-iv-form.pdf Scoring guidelines available from: http://www.adhd.net/snap-iv-instructions.pdf |
| Strengthsand WeaknessesofADHD SymptomsandNormal Behavior Scale(SWAN)                                                | • Versions for a teacher, parent or caregiver • Based onDSM-IVcriteria • Unusual in that the items are positivelywordedanditcoversboth strengthsaswellasweaknessesinADHDandODDsymptoms • Spanish andFrench translations                                                                                                         | http://www.adhd.net/SWAN_SCALE.pdf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| SDQ                                                                                                                 | • Briefmeasureofemotional,ADHD,conductandrelationshipproblems • Versions for a parent, caregiver or teacher andaself-report • Translationsinmanylanguages                                                                                                                                                                       | http://sdqinfo.org                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

ADHD, attention-deficit/hypersensitivity disorder; CD, conduct disorder; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ; ODD, oppositional defiant disorder; SDQ, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire; TTI, Teacher Telephone Interview.

Table 2 | A selection of open access resources for assessing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adulthood

| Approach                                                     | Comments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Websites                                                                                |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Interviews                                                   | Interviews                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Interviews                                                                              |
| Diagnostic Interview for Adult ADHD,secondedition (DIVA 2.0) | • Astructured diagnosticinterviewforADHDinadultsaccordingto DSM-IV • Anewversion based onDSM-5criteria is in press                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | http://www.divacenter.eu/ DIVA.aspx                                                     |
| Adult (ACDS) v1.2                                            | • Asemi-structuredinterviewofcurrentsymptomsofADHDinadults • Provides age-specificpromptsforratingbothchildhoodandadulthood symptoms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Available from the author (Lenard Adler) at: http://www.med.nyu.edu/ biosketch/adlerl01 |
| Scales                                                       | Scales                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Scales                                                                                  |
| Adult ADHDSelf-Report Scale (ASRS)                           | • DevelopedbyWHOtomeasureADHDsymptomsinindividuals >18yearsofage • An18-item versioncoversallDSM-IVsymptomsofADHD • A6-itemversion is ascreening tool validated for adolescents andadults • The 6-item version (ASRS-Telephone Interview Probes for Symptoms; ASRS-TIPS) uses semi-structured interview probes for examples of ADHDsymptoms • Bothversionshavebeentranslatedintomanylanguages | http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ ncs/asrs.php                                            |
| AdultADHDInvestigator SymptomRatingScale (AISRS)             | • IncorporatessuggestedpromptsforeachADHDitem • DescriptorsforeachADHDitemareexplicitlydefined • Takes context intoaccount                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Available from Lenard Adler at: http://www.med.nyu.edu/ biosketch/adlerl01              |
| WenderUtahRating Scale(WURS)                                 | • DevelopedtoretrospectivelydiagnosechildhoodADHDinadults                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Availablefromtheauthors 255                                                             |

ADHD, attention-deficit/hypersensitivity disorder; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders .

very strong evidence that ADHD frequently persists into adulthood, although its presentation changes with age 23,117-119 (FIG. 5) . Nevertheless, ADHD in adults is still undertreated 120 , leading to international efforts to educate clinicians (TABLE 3) and to drive changes to DSM. DSM-5 provides guidance about the differential expression of ADHD symptoms throughout the patient's lifetime. For instance, in contrast to young children, adults with many impairing ADHD symptoms do not typically climb on tables, have boundless energy or run around in a place where one should remain still. Hyperactivity in adulthood is often experienced as a feeling of inner restlessness - an internal 'motor' that never stops - which makes it difficult for the individual to relax 121 . By adopting symptom descriptors of this sort, DSM-5 is easier to apply to adults compared with its predecessors.

Despite these differences in symptom presentation, the diagnostic process for adults parallels the process for youths in regards to documenting symptoms, impairment and onset of the disorder on the basis of a clinical interview with the patient and, when available, reports from informants. This process is aided by the availability of structured diagnostic interviews, such as the Conners' Adult ADHD Diagnostic Interview 122 , along with rating scales for patients and informants, including the Adult Self-Report Scale (TABLE 2) 123 .

In adulthood, additional domains of impairment emerge and can include difficulties related to occupation, marriage and parenting. Patients with high intelligence also present with a unique set of challenges. In these individuals, impairment can be assessed relative to their aptitude. Some of these patients go to great lengths to accommodate their symptoms, which itself indicates impairment to the degree that it causes distress or displaces other activities. For example, to achieve satisfactory grades, a university student with ADHD might need to work twice as hard as peers with the same aptitude to focus attention or to organize school work. If that restricts the student's social life or causes other problems, it might be viewed as impairing. Nonetheless, ADHD can be reliably diagnosed in these patients 124 . Finally, in adults with ADHD, hyperactive-impulsive symptoms usually become internalized, such as feeling restless, and deficient emotional self-regulation 125 and executive dysfunction 126  become increasingly prominent. Although deficient emotional regulation and executive dysfunction are not diagnostic for ADHD, they are highly characteristic of the disorder in adults and could indicate the need for specific treatments, such as cognitive-  behavioural therapy, to improve o  rganizational or emotional self-regulation skills.

## Heterogeneity of ADHD

Patients with ADHD show marked variation in profiles of symptoms, impairments, complicating factors, neuropsychological weaknesses and underlying causes 127 . Accordingly, effective partitioning of this hetero  geneity to refine diagnostic approaches and to provide tailored and targeted treatments remains an important research goal. To address this aim, DSM-5 recognizes three presen  tations: predominantly inatten  tive, predominantly hyperactive-impulsive and combined. These presentations are no longer deemed 'subtypes', as in prior versions, because they can change over time 128 . Moreover, even within presentations, patients greatly differ in symptom profiles. For instance, the predominantly inattentive presentation applies to individuals with a wide range of inattention and can include subthreshold hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Although common in population samples, inattentive ADHD is  less  common in the clinic, which suggests that

## PRIMER

Figure 5 | Developmental course of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in persistent cases. Although no single sequence of events describes the pathway from in utero to adulthood, this figure describes key developmental events, with boxes spanning their approximate onset along with hypotheses about the timing of the biological underpinnings of aetiological events and pathophysiological expression. ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder . Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

population screening for marked inattention should be considered, especially in female children and adults, in which this pattern might be particularly impairing 129 . Persistent inattention - even at subthreshold levels - is a key predictor of poor a  cademic outcomes 130 .

Psychiatric co-morbidity is another clinically important dimension of ADHD heterogeneity. At one extreme, a small proportion of clinic-referred individuals are free of co-morbidity; at the other end, some patients have a complex pattern of multiple problems, including communication disorders, intellectual disabilities 131 , sleep disorders 132 , specific learning disabilities 131 , mood disorders 131 , disruptive behaviour 131 , anxiety disorders 131 , tic disorders 131 , autism spectrum disorders 131,133 and substance use disorders 131,134,135 . Consideration of a patient's co-morbidity profile is important, as it will influence treatment planning.

Pathophysiological heterogeneity might be important clinically - although new research is required to determine whether subtyping on the basis of genetic, environmental,  neurobiological  or  neuropsychological factors will improve diagnostic and treatment approaches. In this regard, the largest body of evidence relates to cognition. Objective tests indicate that several distinct deficit profiles exist. For example, only a minority of patients show a deficit in executive function 136 , which was once thought to be the core deficit in ADHD. Other patients, who are clear of such deficits, have problems in non-executive cognitive processes, which include those involved in basic memory and temporal processing, motivational processing (delay tolerance or reinforcement processing) and cognitive energetic regulation 72,73,137 . Four cognitive ADHD subtypes were revealed in a study based on a community of children with or without ADHD 70 ; however, whether these subtypes predict treatment response or course remains unclear.

The heterogeneity of ADHD has implications for both research and practice. In research, the diluting effect of heterogeneity reduces effect sizes in ADHD case-control comparisons and renders biomarkers that are identified on the assumption that ADHD is pathophysiologically homogeneous obsolete. Clinically, hetero  geneity means that tests - either neuropsychological or tests of other underlying processes - that focus on only one domain will be of very limited diagnostic value. However, such assessments could help to identify specific targets for therapeutic and educational interventions that are aimed at remediating particular areas of impairment and weakness. For instance, individuals with working memory deficits might respond f  avourably to working memory training 138 .

## Management

By educating patients and families, clinicians can create a framework that increases treatment adherence, proactively plans for continuity of treatment throughout the lifetime of the patient and effectively integrates pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches. Education includes information about the causes of ADHD, its associated morbidity, the potential for a compromised course, the rationale for treatments and plans for key life transitions 139 .  This education sets the stage for managing ADHD within a chronic care paradigm that uses shared decision making to bolster treatment adherence and prepare patients for developmental challenges 140 .

There are geographic variations in the sequencing of pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments. For example, in the United States pharmacological  treatment  is  typically  the  first  approach, whereas in Europe medication is usually reserved for severe cases or for milder cases that do not respond to non-pharmacological treatments 141 .

## Pharmacological treatments

Before choosing a treatment, clinical experience advises several common-sense precautions. Appropriate attention needs to be given to the psychosocial environment. In children, particular attention needs to be paid as to whether the family is intact or separated, whether both parents are supportive of the child's treatment and whether there are any concerns about abuse or maltreatment. In addition, legal concerns, psycho  pathology and substance use in the parents, psychosocia  l stressors (such as financial and medical distress), access to firearms and the intellectual abilities of the parents are assessed because treatments might not be effective in 'chaotic' or potentially dangerous environments. Access to medications can also be an issue, owing to a lack of health insurance or restrictive policies by some governments or managed care formularies. Pharmacotherapy for ADHD will not address these issues, but appropriate social services or non-pharmacological interventions can mitigate their effects. It is important to educate p  arents and patients about ADHD and its treatments to help them to u  nderstand the value of treatment options.

The choice of medication is guided by assessing the severity of the symptoms, the presence of co-  morbidities (FIG. 6) and what periods of the day symptom relief is needed - for example, during school hours only, during an extended school day, during a work day or during the evening. With few exceptions, medications to treat ADHD help patients 7 days a week throughout the year because the condition affects aspects of life outside the school or work day, such as socializing, driving, doing homework and functioning in the family environment.

The pharmacological decision-making approach starts with whether the patient will benefit from a stimulant or non-stimulant treatment. Meta-analyses have demonstrated that stimulant and non-stimulant medications for ADHD effectively reduce ADHD symptoms in children and adults 142,143 . By contrast, in preschoolaged children, evidenced-based non-pharmacological treatments are recommended as the first approach, when available, but medication is indicated when symptoms are severe 144 . On average, stimulants (amphetamine and methylphenidate) are more efficacious than nonstimulants (atomoxetine, guanfacine and clonidine) 145 . Accordingly, stimulants continue to be the first-line psychopharmacological treatment for patients of all ages with ADHD 120 .

Pharmacological treatments are typically long term, except for those patients who do not have a persistent course of ADHD. These treatments are generally associated with improved outcomes in children and adults, as have been demonstrated by systematic reviews that considered a range of different criteria to measure long-term outcomes. For instance, a systematic review examined five randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and ten openlabel extension studies of adults with ADHD that had been conducted for at least 2 years 146 . The authors concluded that stimulant therapy for ADHD has long-term beneficial effects and is well tolerated. In addition, a systematic review of adult and child studies that had been carried out over at least 2 years concluded that treating

| Table 3 | Selected resources for clinicians, parents and patients   | Table 3 | Selected resources for clinicians, parents and patients                                                                         | Table 3 | Selected resources for clinicians, parents and patients   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Organization                                                        | Content                                                                                                                                   | Websites                                                            |
| USNIMH                                                              | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.nimh.nih.gov                                             |
| American Professional Society for ADHDandRelatedDisorders           | Meetings for health professionals andresearchers                                                                                          | http://www.apsard.org                                               |
| ADHDWorldFederation                                                 | Meetings for health professionals andresearchers                                                                                          | http://www.adhd-federation.org                                      |
| ChildrenandAdultswithADHD                                           | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.chadd.org                                                |
| ADHDinAdults                                                        | Continuing education for health professionals                                                                                             | http://www.adhdinadults.com                                         |
| CanadianADHDResourceAlliance                                        | Continuing education andmeetingsforhealthprofessionalsand researchers; National ClinicalGuidelinesforADHD;andpolicy workwiththegovernment | http://www.caddra.ca                                                |
| AustralianNHMRC                                                     | Information for health professionals, patients andfamilies                                                                                | http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/ guidelines-publications/mh26               |
| ADHDEurope                                                          | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.adhdeurope.eu                                            |
| EuropeanNetworkonAdultADHD                                          | Meetings for health professionals andresearchers                                                                                          | http://www.eunetworkadultadhd.com/                                  |
| International Collaborationon ADHDandSubstanceAbuse                 | Meetings for health professionals andresearchers                                                                                          | http://www.adhdandsubstanceabuse.org                                |
| UKAdultADHDNetwork                                                  | Meetings for health professionals andresearchers                                                                                          | http://www.ukaan.org                                                |
| ADHDIndia                                                           | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.adhdindia.com                                            |
| ChinaADHDAlliance                                                   | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.adhd-china.org/en-index.htm                              |
| Zentrales adhs-netz (German CentralADHDNetwork)                     | Information for patients andfamilies                                                                                                      | http://www.zentrales-adhs-netz.de                                   |
| AmericanAcademyofPediatrics ADHDToolkit                             | Information for health professionals                                                                                                      | http://www2.aap.org/pubserv/ adhd2/1sted.html                       |

ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; NHMRC, National Health and Medical Research Council; NIMH, National Institute of Mental Health.

## PRIMER

Figure 6 | Assessment guides management. The management of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) considers psychiatric, psychological and medical co-morbidity. DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , fifth edition; ICD-10, International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems , tenth edition; IQ, intelligence quotient. Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

ADHD improved long-term outcomes but generally not to normal levels 147 . Another study found that longterm medication use was associated with improved achievement test scores 148 . Furthermore, a systematic review of placebo-controlled discontinuation studies and prospective long-term observational studies concluded that medication reduced ADHD symptoms and impairments, but that there was limited and inconsistent evidence for long-term medication effects on improved social functioning, academic achievement, employment status and psychiatric co-morbidity 149 . Finally, although pharmacological approaches are generally efficacious, an important source of treatment failure is non-adherence to medication. For example, this was demonstrated in the 2-year follow-up of the Multimodal Treatment of ADHD (MTA) study of children with ADHD, which reported that continuing medication use partly m  ediated improved long-term outcomes 150 .

Stimulants. When choosing a stimulant, the first decision is whether to use a methylphenidate product or an amphetamine product, both of which modulate the action of dopamine. Methylphenidate and amphetamine block the dopamine transporter and amphetamine also promotes the release and reverse transport of dopamine. Although the efficacy of both classes of stimulants is similar, some patients preferentially respond to and tolerate one or the other 143 . There are no reliable predictors of individual patient responses. Both families of stimulants have short-acting (2-4 hours), intermediate-  acting (6-8 hours) and long-acting (10-12 hours) formulations that enable clinicians to tailor duration of coverage for each patient. Starting the patient on a low dose and titrating at weekly intervals depending on response and adverse effects is prudent - the goal being to provide the optimal duration of coverage throughout the day according to the needs of the patient 151 . For all stimu  lant formulations, the duration of effect varies from patient to patient 152 . Thus, the titration of stimulants addresses the onset and duration of effect as well as overall efficacy and adverse events. For example, long-acting stimulants take 1-2 hours to begin working; thus, patients are told when to take the medication to secure benefit at the beginning of the school or work day. For some patients, the effects of long-acting stimulants can wear off by mid-to-late afternoon, and they might, therefore, need additional pharmacological coverage to help to control symptoms later in the day. In such cases, the prescription of a short-acting f  ormulation of the same drug can be used to extend its coverage.

Common adverse effects of stimulants are initial insomnia, decreased appetite, dysphoria and irritability. Sleep disturbances are very common in patients with ADHD, independent of stimulant use 132 , but those related to stimulant use require parents to be instructed on how to improve sleep hygiene or pharmacological management. For example, a long-acting stimulant can be replaced with an inter  mediate-acting formulation, or sleep onset can be improved with sleep aids such as mela  tonin 153 . As appetite suppression usually occurs in the middle of the day, its effects can usually be mitigated by taking the medication after breakfast. In addition, a substantial breakfast and dinner as well as snacking during the day will manage energy levels and safeguard nutrition. If these measures are not sufficient, nutritional supplementation can be useful 154 . In severe cases of weight loss or growth delays, reducing the dose or discontinuing it over the weekend may be appropriate. Management of dysphoria and irritability depends on whether these symptoms occur during the peak or trough of the bioavailability of the medication, as indicated by its pharmacokinetic curve 155,156 . If these symptoms occur during the peaks of drug bioavailability, switching to another stimulant is an option. If they occur during the troughs, they might be attributable to withdrawal or rebound effects, which can be mitigated by adding a small dose of a short-acting stimulant 1 hour before the symptoms occur. For patients that are sensitive to peaks and troughs of b  ioavailability, single-peak formulations can be considered.

Although serious adverse effects are rare, they do occur. The onset of tics, acute anxiety states, depression, psychosis and mania requires both the prompt discontinuation of treatment and the search for alternative approaches consistent with emergent symptoms and diagnoses 157 . Stimulants can be associated with small delays in growth in height, but these tend to attenuate with time and seem not to affect ultimate height and weight in adulthood 158 . Nevertheless, abnormal growth parameters can indicate the need to change treatments. Evidence for the association of other serious adverse events with stimulant use for ADHD is less robust. For example, some studies have raised concerns that stimulants cause sudden cardiac death, and one Danish study ( n =  714,258) found that stimulant use was associated with an increased risk of any adverse cardiovascular event (adjusted hazard ratio of 1.83). These data from the Danish study are difficult

to interpret because the category of 'any' included hypertension, rheumatic fever and cardiovascular disease not otherwise specified; this final category accounted for 40% of cases 159 . Moreover, a study from the United States ( n =  1,200,438) reported that ADHD drugs (methylphenidate, amphetamine and atomoxetine) did not increase the risk of serious cardio  vascular events in children and young adults 160 . The same was true for a subanalysis limited to methylphenidate, which was the only drug with sufficient data. In addition, a meta-analysis of observational studies concluded that ADHD drugs (mostly methylphenidate and amphetamine) did not increase the risk of sudden death in children 161 . Thus, for patients with pre-existing cardiac conditions, stimulants should be used cautiously and only after consultation with a cardiologist 162,163 , and in all patients treated with stimulants, blood pressure should be monitored during treatment. Stimulants can be used cautiously - or not at all - in the presence of tic, bipolar, anxiety, and s  ubstance use disorders and seizures.

Non-stimulants. Two classes of non-stimulants have been approved by regulatory agencies for the treatment of ADHD. These include the selective noradrenaline re  uptake inhibitor atomoxetine 164 and long-acting formulations of two α2-adrenergic agonist drugs - clonidine 165 and guanfacine 166 . These drugs are effective in the management of ADHD, but the sedative effects of α2-adrenergic agonists limit their use in some patients 165,167 .

Similar to stimulants, these medications require slow titration to avoid adverse effects by starting with a low dose and adjusting it based on outcomes. Atomoxetine can be administered once or twice daily. Long-acting guanfacine was tested in children and found to be more effective at higher doses, but these doses were associated with more adverse effects. α2-adrenergic agonists can also be administered once or twice daily. Their efficacy has been documented for young children but not for a  dolescents and adults.

Combined therapy with stimulants and atomoxetine or a long-acting α2-adrenergic agonist might be effective for patients who have been unresponsive to mono  therapy 168 , but the implications of these combined therapies for cardiovascular safety have not been adequately studied. Patients who do not respond to stimulants, atomoxetine or α2-adrenergic agonists might respond to other medications that have been used off-label in the management of ADHD, such as tri  cyclic antidepressants, bupropion (an antidepressant) or modafinil (a wakefulness-  promoting agent that is commonly used to treat narcolepsy). Although some data support the efficacy of these offlabel medications for the treatment of ADHD 169 , regulatory agencies in the United States and the European Union have not approved their use in this context.

Psychiatric co-morbidity. The co-morbidities of ADHD affect the clinical picture of this disorder and its management. The rule of thumb is to address the most serious disorder first. For example, it would be almost impossible to manage ADHD in the presence of a serious, active mood or substance use disorder; these conditions need to be addressed first. However, when the other disorder is appropriately managed, ADHD can then be treated effectively 170 . As a result, combined treatments are frequently used for the management of ADHD in i  ndividuals with co-morbidity.

For patients with active substance use disorders, stimulants are contraindicated or are used cautiously, owing to concerns about the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion by the patient or caregiver. Such concerns contrast with substantial literature that indicates stimulant use in childhood has a protective effect on subsequent smoking 171 and neutral or protective effects on sub  sequent drug and alcohol use disorders 172-175 . However, substantial data indicate that a minority of patients with ADHD divert their stimulant medication for misuse by others 176 .

Atomoxetine has been tested successfully in the manage  ment of ADHD in the context of co-morbidity with tics, anxiety and depression 177,178 , and one review suggested that α2-adrenergic agonists yield the best combined improvement for ADHD that is co-morbid with tic disorders 179 . Bupropion is approved for use in depression in adults, and its efficacy in ADHD has been confirmed in a meta-analysis 180 . Some reports have documented the efficacy of stimulants 181 , extended-release guanfacine 182 and atomoxetine 183 for the treatment of co-morbid o  ppositional defiant d  isorder symptoms.

When treated with ADHD medications, patients with intellectual disabilities 184 or traumatic brain injury 185 show a reduction in ADHD symptoms. General cognitive ability is not responsive to ADHD pharmacotherapy; however, some data suggest that atomoxetine can modestly improve dyslexia 186 and that stimulants 187 and atomoxetine 188 yield  modest improvements in behavioural measures of executive functioning as well as performance on executive memory, reaction time and inhibitory control tasks 72 . Although some academic performance problems associated with symptoms of ADHD (for example, homework completion) can improve with treatment, medication cannot replace missing skills, improve academic achievement scores or ameliorate specific learning disabilities 189 .

Taken together, it is clear that finding an effective formulation, daily dose and dosing schedule for an ADHD medication is crucial for successful treatment. The use of tools such as management decision trees that summarize recommendations about pharmacotherapy and the integration of non-pharmacological treatments can be useful in guiding ADHD management (FIG. 7) . The efficacy of these treatments will be augmented by monitoring both symptomatic and functional outcomes and promoting adherence 151 .

## Non-pharmacological treatments

Non-pharmacological approaches for the treatment of ADHD might be required for several reasons. First, some patients do not respond positively to medication and might experience, for example, poor symptom control, unmanageable adverse events or both. Second, medication alone might not produce optimal results across all domains of ADHD-related impairment. Third, patients might not have access to medication because of either

parent or clinician concern or restrictive government policies that limit access. Even in jurisdictions where medications are licensed and available, there are variations in expert recommendations. Last, patients might be considered too young or to have an insufficiently severe p  resentation to warrant medication 190 .

A range of dietary, behavioural and neurocognitive therapies are used as either precursors to, instead of, or as a complement to medication to target co-morbid conditions and broader patterns of psychosocial impairment. The strength and quality of supporting evidence vary widely from treatment to treatment; in general, even when efficacy is shown, effect sizes are substantially smaller than for optimized medication 191,192 . In addition, adverse events are typically not reported in nonpharmacological trials - whether the lack of reporting is because adverse events do not occur or are not m  easured remains unclear. Data on the cost effectiveness of treatment are also scant. No simple algorithm can choose among these treatments, and treatment use should be determined by the individual needs and c  ircumstances of patients and their families.

Dietary interventions. Dietary interventions are of two general types: supplements and exclusions. A metaanalysis concluded that dietary treatments can play a potentially positive but limited therapeutic part in managing ADHD 193 . The clearest evidence has supported

Figure 7 | Management decision tree. The choice of medication for treating attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) considers contraindications, personal preferences, psychiatric co-morbidity and the duration of coverage required. Non-pharmacological treatments target residual disability and are used initially for preschool-aged children or when medication is declined by the patient or parent. Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

supplementation with free fatty acids, but the clinical effects were small 193 . Insufficient evidence supports other supplement types, for example, vitamins or herbs, or homeopathic approaches. Finally, exclusion diets - those generally targeting artificial additives and those addressing idiosyncratic intolerances - also demonstrated positive effects, but these were, on average, very small (when blinded measures were used) or predominantly in a s  ubgroup of patients with known food intolerances 193,194 .

Behavioural interventions. Behavioural interventions are the best-established, most positively recommended and most widely used form of psychological treatment 195 . The well-tested principles of positive and negative reinforce  ment and social learning provide the foundation for a range of techniques that are often modified to increase their value for patients with ADHD, to reduce inappropriate and promote appropriate behaviour and to improve parent-child relationships 195,196 . In early and middle childhood, this practice typically takes the form of parent training. In addition, behaviourally based, school-focused interventions combined with approaches aimed at adapting classroom structure to aid concentration and deportment also have value 197 . Group and individually administered interventions are also available 198 , and game-like elements designed to increase the child's core regulatory abilities are being introduced. Parent training is positively received by fami  lies, especial  ly when child compliance is the primary problem 140 . However, on the basis of a recent meta-analysis of RCTs restricted to blinded outcomes, behavioural interventions are probably best used to complement - not replace - ADHD medication 199 . Although behavioural interventions have minimal effects on symptoms of ADHD, they have a considerable influence on the quality of parenting and co-occurring c  onduct problems in children with ADHD 199 .

More-focused approaches improve specific areas of daily functioning, such as social 200 or organizational skills 201 .  Although perhaps most beneficial for children who have co-occurring difficulties, behavioural approaches might also be valuable for children without these difficulties. Indeed, improving the quality of parent  ing has longer-term protective effects and thereby reduces the chance that ADHD will escalate to morecomplex and severe forms. School-based approaches that focus on broad-based skills training and academic achievement are also of value in the long term 197,202 . In addition to approaches for children with ADHD, cognitive-  behavioural therapy and life-management skills coaching are recommended for adolescent 203 and adult 204 patients. These skills include self-instructional self-control training, problem solving, use of compensatory strategies, diaries or time schedules and social communication coaching 205 . Individual RCTs provide support for these approaches based on patient-reported ratings, but corroboration through meta-analyses is required. Individual trials also suggest that psychotherapy 206 , family therapy 207 and lifestyle interventions 115 might improve specific areas of functioning in some patients.

Figure 8 | Quality of life and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Throughout the lifetime of the patient, the impairments of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder manifest in psychiatric co-morbidities, health problems, psychological dysfunction, academic and occupational failure, social disability and risky behaviours. Nature Reviews | Disease Primers

<!-- image -->

Neurocognitive interventions. Neurofeedback interventions use adaptive reward-based techniques to normalize specific elements of a patient's aberrant electrophysiological profile that are thought to mediate problems with attention 208 . Such interventions target either specific electroencephalogram frequency bands or slow or late components of event-related potentials. Some RCTs have provided evidence for the value of neurofeedback for reducing ADHD symptoms, with the most pronounced effect of neurofeedback found for treating inattention 209 . However, recent meta-analyses have concluded that more evidence is required before neurofeedback can be endorsed for treating ADHD symptoms, owing to the lack of robust effects for blinded measures 191,210 .

Other neurocognitive approaches target functions such as working memory and inhibition. Using computers, such approaches train these functions over multiple sessions that continuously challenge the patient's competence by increasing difficulty as performance improves 211 . Recent meta-analyses have demonstrated only small effects on ADHD symptoms when different training approaches were grouped together and effects were measured using blinded outcomes 138,210 . Evidence was weakest for working memory training and strongest for interventions targeting multiple neurocognitive deficits. Effects on targeted deficits, such as working memory in training trials, were positive and highly signifi  cant, although no evidence supported the transfer of these effects to non-targeted deficits, ADHD symptoms or other areas of impairment 138 . Alternative noncomputerized meditation-based approaches - such as mindfulness training - seek to improve the regulation of attentional processes 212 . However, owing to insufficient evidence from well-designed trials, mindfulness training cannot be recommended as a treatment for ADHD.

## Quality of life

ADHD impairs psychosocial functioning in a range of contexts that include social, academic and occupational settings, and the disorder directly affects perceptions of well-being (FIG. 8) . For instance, children and adolescents with ADHD are at high risk of school failure, parental and family conflict, social rejection by peers, low self-esteem and delinquent behaviour. In addition, compared with the general population, the risk of smoking and substance use disorders is increased in patients with ADHD, especially among patients who also have conduct or antisocial personality disorder 213,214 .  Adverse outcomes in adolescence and adulthood for people with ADHD include academic and vocational underachievement, reduced occupational functioning, obesity 215 ,  emotional dysregulation 103 ,  unemployment and suicide attempts 121,216 . Traffic accidents and violations are more frequent in drivers with ADHD 121,217,218 than in those without the

disorder, and family relationships involving individuals with ADHD might be characterized by discord and negative interactions compared with families unaffected by ADHD 217,219-221 . Finally, patients with ADHD or a history of childhood ADHD, particularly from non-medical causes, have higher mortality rates than those without ADHD, as consistently documented in longitudinal studies 222,223 and a recent registry study 224 .

These functional impairments reduce the psychological and social well-being and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) of patients with ADHD 225 . For example, in the pan-European ADHD Observational Research in Europe (ADORE) study, parents reported low HRQOL for their children across a broad range of psycho  social, achievement and self-evaluation domains, which accords with findings from clinical studies 225,226 .  Both inattentive and hyperactiveimpulsive symptoms diminished HRQOL ratings.

The strongest effects on HRQOL measures were found in the psycho  social, achievement and family life domains. Children with ADHD also rated their HRQOL to be lower than that of their peers without ADHD 225 . Similarly, adults with ADHD have a low HRQOL both in adulthood 227,228 and in their r  etrospective reports from childhood 229 .

Although increases in ADHD symptom severity and functional impairment predict poorer HRQOL, the correlations are moderate, which indicates that ADHD symptoms, functional impairment and HRQOL are related but distinct constructs. Accordingly, HRQOL is an important component of a comprehensive assessment. For instance, in the ADORE study, several family factors, such as having a parent with a health or mental health problem, the child living in a single-parent household and maternal smoking during pregnancy, also p  redicted poorer HRQOL 226 .

Table 4 | Outlook for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder research and practice

| Area                        | Approach                                                     | Comments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Technological advances      | GWAS,exomesequencingand whole-genomesequencing               | • GWASwilldiscover genome-wide significant commonDNAriskvariants andquantify the polygenicriskforADHD • Sequencing will discover rare, functional DNAvariants • Expect insights into causal biological pathways relevant to treatment andbiomarkers |
| Technological advances      | iPSCs                                                        | • iPSCs derived from peripheral tissue of patientswithADHDwhocarryknownmutationswillbe usedtocreatebrain cells • Studying these cells will clarify mechanisms andprovide insights for treatment                                                     |
| Technological advances      | Epigenomics, transcriptomics andproteomics                   | • Epigenomics will showhowgenesandtheenvironmentcombinetomodifygeneexpression • Mappingthese pathways will describe the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathophysiologyofADHD                                                                   |
| Technological advances      | Small animal models (such as zebrafish andfruitfly) andiPSCs | • Drugdiscovery requires fasterandcheapermodelsystemstoscreenmoleculesforactivity against targets identified by'omic' studies                                                                                                                       |
| Clinical research           | Therapeuticgamesand computertechnologies                     | • Computertraining methodscouldtargetspecific deficitsandadapttotheneedsofpatients • Incorporatinggamefeaturesshouldimproveacceptabilityandadherence                                                                                                |
| Clinical research           | Treatment adherenceprotocols                                 | • Mobile technologies such as text messaging should improve adherencetoADHDtreatments                                                                                                                                                               |
| Clinical research           | Developmentofscreening andprevention models                  | • Screening methods might decrease the lag between onset of symptomsandtreatment, andthus improve outcomes                                                                                                                                          |
| Clinical research           | Neurobiological subtypes ofADHD                              | • Neuropsychological,neuroimagingandgeneticstudiesmightparsetheheterogeneity ofADHDtoaidthedevelopmentofbetter diagnostic andtreatment strategies                                                                                                   |
| Clinical research           | NewADHDdrugs                                                 | • Biologicalresearchwillyieldnewdrugtargetsfordrugdevelopment                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Longitudinal research       | Studies beginning at conception                              | • Environmental effects onthefetus need to bestudied prospectively to better quantify risk andclarify developmental trajectories associatedwithADHDgenotypes                                                                                        |
| Longitudinal research       | Longitudinal neuroimaging                                    | • ClarifythereasonsforthepersistenceandremissionofADHD • Futureworkwillsolidifythesefindingsandusemultimodalimagingtoshowhowaberrant neurodevelopmentisassociated with symptomtrajectories                                                          |
| International collaboration | PGC                                                          | • Provides aplatform for large-scale data sharing of large samples • Enables highly poweredstudies for the discovery of potential biomarkers andtreatment targets                                                                                   |
| International collaboration | ENIGMA                                                       | • Enables large-scale studies of howgenetic risk variants affect brain structure andfunction • Will provide insight intobrain-basedbiomarkersandtheneuralpathwaysunderlying ADHDsymptoms                                                            |
| Altered funding priorities  | TheRDoCprojectoftheUS NIMH                                   | • Encourages researchers to study dimensional constructs that underlie the expression of multiple disorders • Might lead to a change in howpsychiatric disorders are viewed andclassified                                                           |
| Altered funding priorities  | The EUHorizon 2020 programme                                 | • European funding is increasingly organized around traits andcharacteristicssharedamong diseases anddisorders • This will direct research to focus onlarger, potentially morequantitative disease definitions                                      |

ADHD, attention-deficient/hyperactivity disorder; ENIGMA, Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics through Meta-Analysis; EU, European Union; GWAS, genome-wide association studies; iPSCs, induced pluripotent stem cells; NIMH, National Institute of Mental Health; PGC, Psychiatric Genomics Consortium; RDoC, Research Domain Criteria.

Treatments for ADHD reduce functional impairments and improve HRQOL. This evidence is, so far, almost entirely limited to pharmacological treatments. Epidemiological and clinical studies have found beneficial effects of medication on functioning and HRQOL for stimulants and for atomoxetine 230 . These effects - which were reported for both youths and adults - m  irror, to some extent, medication effects on symptoms of ADHD, although with smaller effect sizes. Medication effects on HRQOL have been found across multiple domains, including key domains relating to achievement in school 231 .  Moreover, findings from national registry studies indicate that the use of medication, particularly stimulants, reduces the risk of accidents and traumarelated emergency department admissions and might have protective effects on substance abuse, suicidal and delinquent behaviour 175,214,232,233 . Given that few data are available on longer-term treatment effects 234,235 , the extent to which changes in HRQOL are mediated by symptom changes, changes in functional impairment or other factors remain unclear 146 . For example, one study found that medication-related improvement of HRQOL persisted following medication withdrawal, even when symptom severity increased 236 , indicating that any potential causeeffect relationships between medication use, symptom and functional impairment reduction and HRQOL require further investigation.

## Outlook

In 2011, the Grand Challenges in Global Mental Health Initiative (GCMHI) defined a set of 25 urgent research priorities 237 . Four GCMHI themes are of high relevance to ADHD: clarifying the causes of the disorder, improving diagnosis and treatment, developing preventive strategies and defining the global burden of disease. These research themes are intertwined. Clarification of the causes of ADHD and identification of the mechanisms underpinning pathophysiology will be the most direct path towards improving therapeutic strategies and identify  ing biomarkers to create objective diagnoses that can select participants for primary prevention protocols (TABLE 4) .

Ongoing and planned research in the next 5 years should yield robust information about which genes and regulatory regions increase the risk of ADHD. This information will come from more powerful GWAS and the use of exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing technologies 238 . To translate genetic findings into mechanisms and to map the biological pathways from genetic variation to disease risk 50 calls for various approaches that encompass bioinformatics, cell-based and animal model research, neuroimaging and behavioural genetic analyses. Although many animal models of ADHD have been developed 239 , very few lend themselves to the much-needed medium-throughput or high-throughput analyses of the effects of genetic risk variants. Promising first steps include models of ADHD that are based on zebrafish 240 and fruitflies 241 . Cellular models of ADHD will benefit from advances in induced pluripotent stem cell technology 242 . The ultimate goal of this work will be to discover new targets for treatment.

Research in humans will be needed to validate the relevance of cell-based and animal model studies. Neuroimaging genetic studies could fill this gap but will require large international collaborations, such as the Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics through MetaAnalysis (ENIGMA) consortium 243 . More importantly, tissue resource centres should prioritize the preservation of brain tissue from patients with ADHD; post-mortem studies of the brains of patients with ADHD are essential for progress in understanding the molecular mechanisms of the disorder. In addition, neurobiological studies will need to implement systematic and statistically sophisticated biological subtyping approaches to clarify the c  linical and biological heterogeneity of ADHD.

Future work will first improve the behavioural diagnosis of ADHD and, in the long run, set the stage for diagnoses that are assisted by biomarker technologies. Current diagnostic criteria will probably be refined to improve the developmental sensitivity of diagnostic criteria from childhood through to adulthood. Research into the best symptom threshold for ADHD in adults will continue. For example, studies have shown that among adults who had at least six out of nine s  ymptoms in childhood, having only four out of six symptoms in adulthood predicts substantial impairment later in life 244 . Future studies should consider balancing symptom thresholds and functional impairment to define valid diagnostic algorithms for more-refined age groups (for example, preschool, childhood, adolescence and adulthood). There is also a need to learn more about the validity of the ADHD diagnosis when onset occurs after 12 years of age. Such research will increase diagnostic accuracy and provide screening methods for clinicians. Finally, the evolution of diagnostic approaches will be influenced by a renewed focus on dimensional clinical and cognitive constructs, such as those described in the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) project of the US National Institute of Mental Health 245 . These approaches discard diagnostic categories when looking into the cognitive and clinical features of ADHD and other related disorders.

The discovery of biomarkers that objectify the diagnosis of ADHD will reduce stigma and might foster 'precision medicine' approaches that are tailored to individual patients. No proposed biomarker currently meets the criteria for validity 246 , but the future application of machine learning 247 might reveal multivariate patterns in biomarker data that have better predictive accuracy. Given the heterogeneity and multifactorial aetiology of ADHD, a successful biomarker will probably i  ncorporate multiple domains of measurement.

Several new drugs for ADHD have passed safety tests and are being tested in humans. Some of these agents have mechanisms of action previously unexploited in ADHD; others are new formulations of existing medications that will provide new options for the timing and duration of efficacy throughout the day. Whereas current medications have dopaminergic or noradrenergic targets, future work might capitalize on studies that implicate the nicotinic acetylcholine 58 , glutamate 44 , γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 248 , serotonin 249 , neurite

outgrowth 50 or endosomal 250 systems. For example, a mouse model has demonstrated that fetal exposure to nicotine yields hyperactivity, reduces cingulate cortex volume, reduces dopamine turnover and responsiveness to methylphenidate and might thereby lead to the identification of new pharmacotherapies 58 . New drugs for ADHD could help clinicians to target specific symptom domains.

Further improvements to non-pharmacological approaches involving diet, mindfulness training, neurofeedback, cognitive training and specific computer gaming might yield innovative approaches. Even if they do not treat the core symptoms of ADHD, they might complement medication and behavioural approaches by treating associated symptoms. Novel approaches to improve adherence to treatment are also being developed. These strategies might have immediate clinical impact given the low level of adherence to ADHD treatments 251 . Interventions are also needed to prevent the misuse and diversion of ADHD medications, especially on university campuses 176 .

Increased patient involvement in research will yield treatment studies of 'real-world' or 'patient-centred' outcomes, such as academic performance, driving, social functioning and QOL. Given that such issues are difficult to address in RCTs, the cautious application of pragmatic clinical trials 252 should lead to a better understanding of how to manage ADHD. It is good news for

- 1 . Barkley, R. A. &amp; Peters, H. The earliest reference to ADHD in the medical literature? Melchior Adam Weikard's description in 1775 of 'attention deficit' (Mangel der Aufmerksamkeit, Attentio Volubilis). J. Atten. Disord. 16 , 623-630 (2012).

people with ADHD that the goal of treatment studies is evolving from reducing ADHD symptoms to eliminating all ADHD symptoms and achieving functional remission and improved QOL 151 .

An important research principle explicitly named by the GCMHI is the implementation of a life-course perspective. With some notable exceptions, research into child and adult forms of ADHD has been carried out in isolation; certain age groups, especially preschool-aged children, adolescents and the elderly, have a relatively small research base. Longitudinal studies are, therefore, needed to define the developmental course of ADHD and to understand why some children with ADHD achieve functional normality in adulthood but others continue to experience a chronic, severely impairing form of the disorder. New research is indeed beginning to define neural predictors and correlates of r  emission 94,95,253 . Defining predictors and correlates of remission might eventually lead to a better allocation of treatment resources to children and adolescents who are at highest risk for persistent and complicated ADHD.

Research innovations along with international and interdisciplinary collaborations promise a bright future for ADHD research. By applying an integrated, benchto-bedside approach, we can make great strides in understanding the aetiology of ADHD, refining its diagnosis, optimizing treatment outcomes and i  mproving the QOL of patients of all ages with ADHD.

10. Michielsen, M. et al. Prevalence of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in older adults in The Netherlands. Br. J. Psychiatry 201 , 298-305 (2012).
2. 2 . Polanczyk, G., de Lima, M. S., Horta, B. L., Biederman, J. &amp; Rohde, L. A. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 164 , 942-948 (2007). This meta-analysis provides both a comprehensive estimate of the prevalence of ADHD in youths and the reasons for its variability worldwide.
3. 3 . Polanczyk, G. V., Willcutt, E. G., Salum, G. A., Kieling, C. &amp; Rohde, L. A. ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol. 43 , 434 -442 (2014).
4. 4 . Thomas, R., Sanders, S., Doust, J., Beller, E. &amp; Glasziou, P . Prevalence of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatrics 135 , e994-e1001 (2015).
5. 5 . Erskine, H. E. et al. Epidemiological modelling of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and conduct disorder for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 54 , 1263-1274 (2013).
6. 6 . Sciutto, M. J. &amp; Eisenberg, M. Evaluating the evidence for and against the overdiagnosis of ADHD. J. Atten. Disord. 11 , 106-113 (2007).
7. 7 . Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J. &amp; Mick, E. The age dependent decline of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis of follow-up studies. Psychol. Med. 36 , 159-165 (2006). This meta-analysis provides a clear estimate of the persistence of ADHD from childhood to adulthood and highlights that, although the majority of ADHD cases detected in childhood do not fulfil the entire diagnostic criteria in adulthood, persistence of impairing systems is common.
8. 8 . Biederman, J., Mick, E. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Age-dependent decline of symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: impact of remission definition and symptom type. Am. J. Psychiatry 157 , 816-818 (2000).
9. Simon, V., Czobor, P ., Balint, S., Meszaros, A. &amp; Bitter, I. Prevalence and correlates of adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis. Br. J. Psychiatry 194 , 204-211 (2009).
10. factors in DSM-III attention deficit disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 29 , 526-533 (1990).
11. Guldberg-Kjar, T . &amp; Johansson, B. Old people reporting childhood AD/HD symptoms: retrospectively self-rated AD/HD symptoms in a population-based Swedish sample aged 65-80. Nord. J. Psychiatry 63 , 375-382 (2009).
12. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edn (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013).
13. Polanczyk, G. et al. Implications of extending the ADHD age-of-onset criterion to age 12: results from a prospectively studied birth cohort. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 49 , 210-216 (2010).
14. Matte, B. et al. ADHD in DSM-5: a field trial in a large, representative sample of 18- to 19-year-old adults. Psychol. Med. 45 , 361-373 (2015).
15. Larsson, H., Sariaslan, A., Langstrom, N., D'Onofrio, B. &amp; Lichtenstein, P . Family income in early childhood and subsequent attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a quasi-experimental study. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 55 , 428-435 (2014).
16. Biederman, J. et al. Educational and occupational underattainment in adults with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a controlled study. J. Clin. Psychiatry 69 , 1217-1222 (2008).
17. Lingineni, R. K. et al. Factors associated with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder among US children: results from a national survey. BMC Pediatr. 12 , 50 (2012).
18. Visser, S. N. et al. T rends in the parent-report of health care provider-diagnosed and medicated attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: United States, 2003-2011. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 53 , 34-46.e2 (2014).
19. Zwirs, B. W. et al. Prevalence of psychiatric disorders among children of different ethnic origin. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 35 , 556-566 (2007).
20. Biederman, J. et al. Further evidence for familygenetic risk factors in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Patterns of comorbidity in probands and relatives in psychiatrically and pediatrically referred samples. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 49 , 728-738 (1992).
21. Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Keenan, K., Knee, D. &amp; Tsuang, M. T . Family-genetic and psychosocial risk
22. Larsson, H., Chang, Z., D'Onofrio, B. M. &amp; Lichtenstein, P . The heritability of clinically diagnosed attention deficit hyperactivity disorder across the lifespan. Psychol. Med. 44 , 2223-2229 (2014).
23. Franke, B. et al. The genetics of attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder in adults, a review. Mol. Psychiatry 17 , 960-987 (2012).
24. Faraone, S. V. et al. Molecular genetics of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1313-1323 (2005).
25. Asherson, P. &amp; Gurling, H. Quantitative and molecular genetics of ADHD. Curr. T op. Behav. Neurosci. 9 , 239-272 (2012).
26. Burt, S. A. Rethinking environmental contributions to child and adolescent psychopathology: a meta-analysis of shared environmental influences. Psychol. Bull. 135 , 608-637 (2009).
27. Larsson, H., Anckarsater, H., Rastam, M., Chang, Z. &amp; Lichtenstein, P . Childhood attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder as an extreme of a continuous trait: a quantitative genetic study of 8,500 twin pairs. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 53 , 73-80 (2012).
28. Chang, Z., Lichtenstein, P ., Asherson, P . J. &amp; Larsson, H. Developmental twin study of attention problems: high heritabilities throughout development. JAMA Psychiatry 70 , 311-318 (2013).
29. Larsson, H. et al. Genetic and environmental influences on adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms: a large Swedish populationbased study of twins. Psychol. Med. 43 , 197-207 (2013).
30. Merwood, A. et al. Genetic associations between the symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and emotional lability in child and adolescent twins. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 53 , 209-220. e4 (2014).
31. Surman, C. B. et al. Deficient emotional self-regulation and adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a family risk analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 168 , 617-623 (2011).
32. 32 . Christiansen, H. et al. Co-transmission of conduct problems with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: familial evidence for a distinct disorder. J. Neural Transm. 115 , 163-175 (2008).

- 33 . Kuntsi, J. et al. The separation of ADHD inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms: pathways from genetic effects to cognitive impairments and symptoms. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 42 , 127-136 (2014).
- 34 . Rommelse, N. N., Franke, B., Geurts, H. M., Hartman, C. A. &amp; Buitelaar, J. K. Shared heritability of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 19 , 281-295 (2010).
- 35 . Cole, J., Ball, H. A., Martin, N. C., Scourfield, J. &amp; McGuffin, P. Genetic overlap between measures of hyperactivity/inattention and mood in children and adolescents. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 48 , 1094-1101 (2009).
- 36 . Doyle, A. E. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Familial links between ADHD, conduct disorder and bipolar disorder. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 4 , 146-152 (2002).
- 37 . Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Identification of risk loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: a genomewide analysis. Lancet 381 , 1371-1379 (2013).
- 38 . Martin, J., Hamshere, M. L., Stergiakouli, E., O'Donovan, M. C. &amp; Thapar, A. Genetic risk for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder contributes to neurodevelopmental traits in the general population. Biol. Psychiatry 76 , 664-671 (2014).
- 39 . Hamshere, M. L. et al. High loading of polygenic risk for ADHD in children with comorbid aggression. Am. J. Psychiatry 170 , 909-916 (2013).
- 40 . Hamshere, M. L. et al. Shared polygenic contribution between childhood attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and adult schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry 203 , 107-111 (2013).
- 41 . Elia, J. et al. Rare structural variants found in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder are preferentially associated with neurodevelopmental genes. Mol. Psychiatry 15 , 637-646 (2010).
- 42 . Williams, N. M. et al. Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a genome-wide analysis. Lancet 376 , 1401-1408 (2010).
- 43 . Williams, N. M. et al. Genome-wide analysis of copy number variants in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder confirms the role of rare variants and implicates duplications at 15q13.3. Am. J. Psychiatry 169 , 195-204 (2012).
- 44 . Elia, J. et al. Genome-wide copy number variation study associates metabotropic glutamate receptor gene networks with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Nat. Genet. 44 , 78-84 (2011).
- 45 . Lesch, K. P . et al. Genome-wide copy number variation analysis in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: association with neuropeptide Y gene dosage in an extended pedigree. Mol. Psychiatry 16 , 491-503 (2011).
- 46 . Neale, B. M. et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 49 , 884-897 (2010).
- 47 . Gizer, I. R., Ficks, C. &amp; Waldman, I. D. Candidate gene studies of ADHD: a meta-analytic review. Hum. Genet. 126 , 51-90 (2009).

,

- 48 . Franke, B. et al. Multicenter analysis of the SLC6A3 / DAT1 VNTR haplotype in persistent ADHD suggests differential involvement of the gene in childhood and persistent ADHD. Neuropsychopharmacology 35 656-664 (2010).
- 49 . Bralten, J. et al. Candidate genetic pathways for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) show association to hyperactive/impulsive symptoms in children with ADHD. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 52 , 1204-1212.e1 (2013).
- 50 . Poelmans, G., Pauls, D. L., Buitelaar, J. K. &amp; Franke, B. Integrated genome-wide association study findings: identification of a neurodevelopmental network for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 168 , 365-377 (2011).
- 51 . Skoglund, C., Chen, Q., D'Onofrio, B. M., Lichtenstein, P . &amp; Larsson, H. Familial confounding of the association between maternal smoking during pregnancy and ADHD in offspring. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 55 , 61-68 (2014).
- 52 . Milberger, S., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Chen, L. &amp; Jones, J. Is maternal smoking during pregnancy a risk factor for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children? Am. J. Psychiatry 153 , 1138-1142 (1996).
- 53 . Harold, G. T . et al. Biological and rearing mother influences on child ADHD symptoms: revisiting the developmental interface between nature and nurture. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 54 , 1038-1046 (2013).
- 54 . Stevens, S. E. et al. Inattention/overactivity following early severe institutional deprivation: presentation and associations in early adolescence. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 36 , 385-398 (2008).
- 55 . Banerjee, T. D., Middleton, F. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Acta Pediatr. 96 , 1269-1274 (2007).
- 56 . Scassellati, C., Bonvicini, C., Faraone, S. V. &amp; Gennarelli, M. Biomarkers and attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analyses. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 51 , 1003-1019.e20 (2012).
- 57 . Dasbanerjee, T. et al. A comparison of molecular alterations in environmental and genetic rat models of ADHD: a pilot study. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet. 147B , 1554-1563 (2008).
- 58 . Zhu, J. et al. Prenatal nicotine exposure mouse model showing hyperactivity, reduced cingulate cortex volume, reduced dopamine turnover, and responsiveness to oral methylphenidate treatment. J. Neurosci. 32 , 9410-9418 (2012).
- 59 . Sagvolden, T., Russell, V. A., Aase, H., Johansen, E. B. &amp; Farshbaf, M. Rodent models of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1239-1247 (2005).
- 60 . van der Meer, D. et al. The serotonin transporter gene polymorphism 5-HTTLPR moderates the effects of stress on attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 55 , 1363-1371 (2014).
- 61 . Mill, J. &amp; Petronis, A. Pre- and peri-natal environmental risks for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): the potential role of epigenetic processes in mediating susceptibility. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 49 ,
- 1020-1030 (2008).
- 62 . Willcutt, E. G., Doyle, A. E., Nigg, J. T ., Faraone, S. V. &amp; Pennington, B. F. Validity of the executive function theory of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analytic review. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1336-1346 (2005).
- 63 . Sergeant, J. A. Modeling attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a critical appraisal of the cognitive-energetic model. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1248-1255 (2005).
- 64 . Sonuga-Barke, E. J. &amp; Fairchild, G. Neuroeconomics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: differential influences of medial, dorsal, and ventral prefrontal brain networks on suboptimal decision making? Biol. Psychiatry 72 , 126-133 (2012).
- 65 . Luman, M., Tripp, G. &amp; Scheres, A. Identifying the neurobiology of altered reinforcement sensitivity in ADHD: a review and research agenda. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34 , 744-754 (2010).
- 66 . Scheres, A., Lee, A. &amp; Sumiya, M. Temporal reward discounting and ADHD: task and symptom specific effects. J. Neural Transm. 115 , 221-226 (2008).
- 67 . Toplak, M. E. &amp; Tannock, R. Time perception: modality and duration effects in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 33 , 639-654 (2005).
- 68 . Tomblin, J. B. &amp; Mueller, K. L. How can the comorbidity with ADHD aid understanding of language and speech disorders? Top. Lang. Disord. 32 , 198-206 (2012).
- 69 . Kuntsi, J. &amp; Klein, C. Intraindividual variability in ADHD and its implications for research of causal links. Curr. T op. Behav. Neurosci. 9 , 67-91 (2012).
- 70 . Fair, D. A., Bathula, D., Nikolas, M. A. &amp; Nigg, J. T . Distinct neuropsychological subgroups in typically developing youth inform heterogeneity in children with ADHD. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 , 6769-6774 (2012).
- 71 . Fliers, E. A. et al. Undertreatment of motor problems in children with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Ment. Health 15 , 85-90 (2009).
- 72 . Coghill, D. R., Seth, S. &amp; Matthews, K. A comprehensive assessment of memory, delay aversion, timing, inhibition, decision making and variability in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: advancing beyond the three-pathway models. Psychol. Med. 44 , 1989-2001 (2014).
- 73 . Sonuga-Barke, E., Bitsakou, P. &amp; Thompson, M. Beyond the dual pathway model: evidence for the dissociation of timing, inhibitory, and delay-related impairments in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 49 345-355 (2010).
- 74 . Cortese, S. et al. T oward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies. Am. J. Psychiatry 169 , 1038-1055 (2012).

,

<!-- image -->

- 75 . Plichta, M. M. &amp; Scheres, A. Ventral-striatal responsiveness during reward anticipation in ADHD and its relation to trait impulsivity in the healthy population: a meta-analytic review of the fMRI literature. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 38 , 125-134 (2014).
- 76 . Fassbender, C. &amp; Schweitzer, J. B. Is there evidence for neural compensation in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder? A review of the functional neuroimaging literature. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 26 , 445-465 (2006).
- 77 . Rubia, K. et al. Effects of stimulants on brain function in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biol. Psychiatry 76 , 616-628 (2014).
- 78 . Hart, H., Radua, J., Nakao, T., Mataix-Cols, D. &amp;  Rubia, K. Meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies of inhibition and attention in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: exploring task-specific, stimulant medication, and age effects. JAMA Psychiatry 70 , 185-198 (2013).
- 79 . Posner, J., Park, C. &amp; Wang, Z. Connecting the dots: a review of resting connectivity MRI studies in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychol. Rev. 24 , 3-15 (2014).
- 80 . Castellanos, F. X. et al. Developmental trajectories of brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA 288 , 1740-1748 (2002).
- 81 . Durston, S. et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of boys with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and their unaffected siblings. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 43 , 332-340 (2004).
- 82 . Greven, C. U. et al. Developmentally stable whole brain volume reductions and developmentally sensitive caudate and putamen volume alterations in participants with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and their unaffected siblings. JAMA Psychiatry 72 , 490-499 (2015).
- 83 . Hoogman, M. et al. Current self-reported symptoms of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder are associated with total brain volume in healthy adults. PLoS ONE 7 , e31273 (2012).
- 84 . Stoodley, C. J. &amp; Schmahmann, J. D. Functional topography in the human cerebellum: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage 44 , 489-501 (2009).
- 85 . Frodl, T . &amp; Skokauskas, N. Meta-analysis of structural MRI studies in children and adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder indicates treatment effects. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 125 , 114-126 (2012).
- 86 . van Ewijk, H., Heslenfeld, D. J., Zwiers, M. P ., Buitelaar, J. K. &amp; Oosterlaan, J. Diffusion tensor imaging in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

36

Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.

, 1093-1106 (2012).

- 87 . Shaw, P. et al. Mapping the development of the basal ganglia in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 53 , 780-789.e11 (2014).
- 88 . Shaw, P. et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a delay in cortical maturation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104 , 19649-19654 (2007).
- 89 . Shaw, P. et al. Development of cortical surface area and gyrification in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 72 , 191-197 (2012).
- 90 . Dreisbach, G. et al. Dopamine and cognitive control: the influence of spontaneous eyeblink rate and dopamine gene polymorphisms on perseveration and distractibility. Behav. Neurosci. 119 , 483-490 (2005).
- 91 . Makris, N. et al. Cortical thinning of the attention and executive function networks in adults with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Cereb. Cortex 17 , 1364-1375 (2007).
- 92 . Clerkin, S. M. et al. Thalamo-cortical activation and connectivity during response preparation in adults with persistent and remitted ADHD. Am. J. Psychiatry 170 , 1011-1019 (2013).
- 93 . Mattfeld, A. T. et al. Brain differences between persistent and remitted attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Brain 137 , 2423-2428 (2014).
- 94 . Francx, W. et al. White matter microstructure and developmental improvement of hyperactive/ impulsive symptoms in attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12379 (2015).

- 95 . Shaw, P. et al. T rajectories of cerebral cortical development in childhood and adolescence and adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 74 , 599-606 (2013). This paper provides an excellent example of the type of longitudinal neuroimaging we can expect in the future. Participants were evaluated for persistence or remission of ADHD symptoms in adulthood. Cortical thinning, especially in the prefrontal cortex, was associated with persistence of ADHD symptoms into adulthood. As such, this paper shows the power of longitudinal research in ADHD to identify the correlates of persistence, which may provide predictive biomarkers for disease outcome.
- 96 . Almeida, L. G. et al. Reduced right frontal cortical thickness in children, adolescents and adults with ADHD and its correlation to clinical variables: a crosssectional study. J. Psychiatr. Res. 44 , 1214-1223 (2010).
- 97 . Almeida Montes, L. G. et al. Brain cortical thickness in ADHD: age, sex, and clinical correlations. J. Atten. Disord. 17 , 641-654 (2013).
- 98 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Biederman, J. Neurobiology of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 44 , 951-958 (1998).
- 99 . Makris, N., Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C. &amp; Seidman, L. J. T owards conceptualizing a neural systems-based anatomy of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. Dev. Neurosci. 31 , 36-49 (2009).
- 100 . Sonuga-Barke, E. J. Causal models of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: from common simple deficits to multiple developmental pathways. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1231-1238 (2005).
- 101 .  Castellanos, F . X. &amp; T annock, R. Neuroscience of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: the search for endophenotypes. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 , 617-628 (2002).
- 102 . Kuntsi, J. et al. Separation of cognitive impairments in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into 2 familial factors. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67 , 1159-1167 (2010).
- 103 . Biederman, J. et al. Deficient emotional self-regulation and pediatric attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a family risk analysis. Psychol. Med. 42 , 639-646 (2012).
- 104 . Epstein, J. N. &amp; Weiss, M. D. Assessing treatment outcomes in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a narrative review. Prim. Care Companion CNS Disord. 14 , PCC.11r01336 (2012).
- 105 . Seixas, M., Weiss, M. &amp; Muller, U. Systematic review of national and international guidelines on attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder. J. Psychopharmacol. 26 , 753-765 (2012).
- 106 . Miller, T . W., Nigg, J. T . &amp; Miller, R. L. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in African American children: what can be concluded from the past ten years? Clin. Psychol. Rev. 29 , 77-86 (2009).
- 107 .  Klimkeit, E. et al. Children should be seen and heard: self-report of feelings and behaviors in primary-schoolage children with ADHD. J. Atten. Disord. 10 , 181-191 (2006).
- 108 . Biederman, J., Keenan, K. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Parent based diagnosis of attention deficit disorder predicts a diagnosis based on teacher report. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 29 , 698-701 (1990).
- 109 . Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Monuteaux, M. &amp; Grossbard, J. How informative are parent reports of ADHD symptoms for assessing outcome in clinical trials of long-acting treatments? A pooled analysis of parents' and teachers' reports. Pediatrics 113 , 1667-1671 (2004).
- 110 .  Sayal, K. &amp; Goodman, R. Do parental reports of child hyperkinetic disorder symptoms at school predict teacher ratings? Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 18 , 336-344 (2009).

This large-scale epidemiological study of 5-16 years olds in the United Kingdom provides empirical evidence that parental reports about ADHD symptoms at school have limited use in predicting teacher ratings, thereby highlighting the importance of obtaining information directly from teachers for the diagnosis of ADHD in childhood.

- 111 .  McKeown, R. E. et al. The impact of case definition on attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder prevalence estimates in community-based samples of school-aged children. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 54 , 53-61 (2015).
- This large-scale US-based study demonstrates how case definition and inclusion of changes in DSM-5
- criteria for ADHD (for example, age of onset, symptoms causing impairment in at least two settings and reduction in the number of symptoms required for individuals ≥17 years of age) alter the prevalence estimates of ADHD in a community-based sample of school-aged children.
- 112 .  Valo, S. &amp; T annock, R. Diagnostic instability of DSM-IV ADHD subtypes: effects of informant source, instrumentation, and methods for combining symptom reports. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 39 , 749-760 (2010).
- 113 .  Feldman, H. M. &amp; Reiff, M. I. Clinical practice. Attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. N. Engl. J. Med. 370 , 838-846 (2014).
- 114 .  Becker, A., Rothenberger, A. &amp; Sohn, A. Six years ahead: a longitudinal analysis regarding course and predictive value of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) in children and adolescents. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 24 , 715-725 (2015).
- 115 .  Halperin, J. M., Berwid, O. G. &amp; O'Neill, S. Healthy body, healthy mind? The effectiveness of physical activity to treat ADHD in children. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 899-936 (2014).
- 116 .  Plueck, J. et al. Effectiveness of a teacher-based indicated prevention program for preschool children with externalizing problem behavior. Prev. Sci. 16 , 233-241 (2015).
- 117 .  Biederman, J. et al. Gender effects of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults, revisited. Biol. Psychiatry 55 , 692-700 (2004).
- 118 .  Faraone, S. V. et al. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults: an overview. Biol. Psychiatry 48 , 9-20 (2000).
- 119 .  Kooij, S. J. et al. European consensus statement on diagnosis and treatment of adult ADHD: The European Network Adult ADHD. BMC Psychiatry 10 , 67 (2010).

This article was the first European consensus about ADHD in adults. It provides an excellent review of the neurobiology, diagnosis and treatment of adults with ADHD.

- 120 . The Express Scripts Lab. T urning attention to ADHD. An Express Scripts Report. U. S. Medication T rends for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. The Lab Express Scripts [online], http://lab.express-scripts. com/insights/industry-updates/report-turningattention-to-adhd (2014).
- 121 . Barkley, R. A., Murphy, K. R. &amp; Fischer, M. ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says (Guildford, 2007).
- 122 . Epstein, J. N. &amp; Kollins, S. H. Psychometric properties of an adult ADHD diagnostic interview. J. Atten. Disord. 9 , 504-514 (2006).
- 123 . Adler, L. A. et al. Validity of pilot adult ADHD SelfReport Scale (ASRS) to rate adult ADHD symptoms. Ann. Clin. Psychiatry 18 , 145-148 (2006).
- 124 . Antshel, K. M. et al. Is adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder a valid diagnosis in the presence of high IQ? Psychol. Med. 39 , 1325-1335 (2009).
- 125 . Barkley, R. A. Deficient emotional self-regulation: a core component of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. ADHD Related Disord. 1 , 5-37 (2010).
- 126 . Biederman, J. et al. Stability of executive function deficits into young adult years: a prospective longitudinal follow-up study of grown up males with ADHD. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 116 , 129-136 (2007).
- 127 . Sonuga-Barke, E. J. &amp; T aylor, E. in Rutter's Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry (eds Thapar, A. et al. ) 738-756 (Wiley Blackwell, 2015).
- 128 . Nigg, J. T ., T annock, R. &amp; Rohde, L. A. What is to be the fate of ADHD subtypes? An introduction to the special section on research on the ADHD subtypes and implications for the DSM-V. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 39 , 723-725 (2010).
- 129 . Staller, J. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in girls: epidemiology and management. CNS Drugs 20 , 107-123 (2006).
- 130 . Pingault, J. B. et al. Childhood trajectories of inattention and hyperactivity and prediction of educational attainment in early adulthood: a 16-year longitudinal population-based study. Am. J. Psychiatry 168 , 1164-1170 (2011).
- 131 . Biederman, J., Newcorn, J. &amp; Sprich, S. Comorbidity of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with conduct, depressive, anxiety, and other disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 148 , 564-577 (1991).
- 132 . Cortese, S., Faraone, S. V., Konofal, E. &amp; Lecendreux, M. Sleep in children with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis of subjective and objective studies. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 48 , 894-908 (2009).
- 133 . Antshel, K. M., Zhang-James, Y. &amp; Faraone, S. V. The comorbidity of ADHD and autism spectrum disorder. Expert Rev. Neurother. 13 , 1117-1128 (2013).
- 134 . Wilens, T . E. et al. Does ADHD predict substance-use disorders? A 10-year follow-up study of young adults with ADHD. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 50 , 543-553 (2011).
- 135 . Bernardi, S. et al. The lifetime impact of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Psychol. Med. 42 , 875-887 (2012).
- 136 . Nigg, J. T ., Willcutt, E. G., Doyle, A. E. &amp; Sonuga-Barke, E. J. Causal heterogeneity in ADHD: do we need neuropsychological subtypes? Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1224-1230 (2005).
- 137 . Sjowall, D., Roth, L., Lindqvist, S. &amp; Thorell, L. B. Multiple deficits in ADHD: executive dysfunction, delay aversion, reaction time variability, and emotional deficits. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 54 , 619-627 (2013).
- 138 . Cortese, S. et al. Cognitive training for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis of clinical and neuropsychological outcomes from randomized controlled trials. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 54 , 164-174 (2015).
- 139 . Nussey, C., Pistrang, N. &amp; Murphy, T . How does psychoeducation help? A review of the effects of providing information about Tourette syndrome and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Child Care Health Dev. 39 , 617-627 (2013).
- 140 . Fiks, A. G., Mayne, S., Debartolo, E., Power, T . J. &amp; Guevara, J. P. Parental preferences and goals regarding ADHD treatment. Pediatrics 132 , 692-702 (2013).
- 141 . Atkinson, M. &amp; Hollis, C. NICE guideline: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Arch. Dis. Child Educ. Pract. Ed. 95 , 24-27 (2010).
- 142 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Glatt, S. J. A comparison of the efficacy of medications for adult attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder using meta-analysis of effect sizes. J. Clin. Psychiatry 71 , 754-763 (2010). This study is among the most comprehensive meta-analytic efforts in reviewing the efficacy of stimulants and non-stimulants in adults with ADHD.
- 143 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Buitelaar, J. Comparing the efficacy of stimulants for ADHD in children and adolescents using meta-analysis. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 19 , 353-364 (2010).
- 144 . Wolraich, M. et al. ADHD: clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. Pediatrics 128 , 1007-1022 (2011).
- 145 . Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Spencer, T . J. &amp; Aleardi, M. Comparing the efficacy of medications for ADHD using meta-analysis. MedGenMed. 8 , 4 (2006).
- 146 . Fredriksen, M., Halmoy, A., Faraone, S. V. &amp; Haavik, J. Long-term efficacy and safety of treatment with stimulants and atomoxetine in adult ADHD: a review of controlled and naturalistic studies. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 23 , 508-527 (2013).
- 147 . Shaw, M. et al. A systematic review and analysis of long-term outcomes in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: effects of treatment and non-treatment. BMC Med. 10 , 99 (2012).
- 148 . Langberg, J. M. &amp; Becker, S. P . Does long-term medication use improve the academic outcomes of youth with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder? Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev. 15 , 215-233 (2012).
- 149 . van de Loo-Neus, G. H., Rommelse, N. &amp; Buitelaar, J. K. T o stop or not to stop? How long should medication treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder be extended? Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 21 , 584-599 (2011).
- 150 . MTA Cooperative Group. National Institute of Mental Health Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD follow-up: 24-month outcomes of treatment strategies for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics 113 , 754-761 (2004).
- 151 . Rostain, A., Jensen, P . S., Connor, D. F., Miesle, L. M. &amp; Faraone, S. V. T oward quality care in ADHD: defining the goals of treatment. J. Atten Disord. 19 , 99-117 (2015).
- 152 . Ermer, J. et al. Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate: linear dose-proportionality, low intersubject and intrasubject variability, and safety in an open-label single-dose pharmacokinetic study in healthy adult volunteers. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 50 , 1001-1010 (2010).

- 153 . Bendz, L. M. &amp; Scates, A. C. Melatonin treatment for insomnia in pediatric patients with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Ann. Pharmacother. 44 , 185-191 (2009).
- 154 . Cortese, S. et al. Practitioner review: current best practice in the management of adverse events during treatment with ADHD medications in children and adolescents. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 54 , 227-246 (2013).
- 155 . Maldonado, R. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy of new extended-release formulations of methylphenidate. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 9 , 1001-1014 (2013).
- 156 . Kimko, H. et al. Population pharmacodynamic modeling of various extended-release formulations of methylphenidate in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder via meta-analysis. J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn. 39 , 161-176 (2012).
- 157 . Wilens, T . E. ADHD: Prevalence, diagnosis, and issues of comorbidity. CNS Spectr. 12 (Suppl. 6), 1-5 (2007).
- 158 . Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Morley, C. P . &amp; Spencer, T. J. Effect of stimulants on height and weight: a review of the literature. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 47 , 994-1009 (2008).

,

- 159 . Dalsgaard, S., Kvist, A. P ., Leckman, J. F., Nielsen, H. S. &amp; Simonsen, M. Cardiovascular safety of stimulants in children with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: a nationwide prospective cohort study. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 24 302-310 (2014).
- 160 . Cooper, W. O. et al. ADHD drugs and serious cardiovascular events in children and young adults. N. Engl. J. Med. 365 , 1896-1904 (2011). This article is among the more-informative studies documenting the cardiac safety of stimulants.
- 161 . Mazza, M. et al. Drugs for attention deficithyperactivity disorder do not increase the mid-term risk of sudden death in children: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Int. J. Cardiol. 168 , 4320-4321 (2013).
- 162 . American Academy of Pediatrics/American Heart Association. American Academy of Pediatrics/ American Heart Association clarification of statement on cardiovascular evaluation and monitoring of children and adolescents with heart disease receiving medications for ADHD: May 16, 2008. J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 29 , 335 (2008).
- 163 . Warren, A. E. et al. Cardiac risk assessment before the use of stimulant medications in children and youth: a joint position statement by the Canadian Paediatric Society, the Canadian Cardiovascular Society, and the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Can. J. Cardiol. 25 , 625-630 (2009).
- 164 . T anaka, Y., Rohde, L. A., Jin, L., Feldman, P . D. &amp; Upadhyaya, H. P. A meta-analysis of the consistency of atomoxetine treatment effects in pediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder from 15 clinical trials across four geographic regions. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 23 , 262-270 (2013).
- 165 . Jain, R., Segal, S., Kollins, S. H. &amp; Khayrallah, M. Clonidine extended-release tablets for pediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 50 , 171-179 (2011).
- 166 . Biederman, J. et al. Long-term, open-label extension study of guanfacine extended release in children and adolescents with ADHD. CNS Spectr. 13 , 1047-1055 (2008).
- 167 . Faraone, S. V., McBurnett, K., Sallee, F. R., Steeber, J. &amp; Lopez, F. A. Guanfacine extended release: a novel treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. Clin. Ther. 35 , 1778-1793 (2013).
- 168 . T reuer, T . et al. A systematic review of combination therapy with stimulants and atomoxetine for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder, including patient characteristics, treatment strategies, effectiveness, and tolerability. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 23 , 179-193 (2013).
- 169 . Maneeton, N., Maneeton, B., Intaprasert, S. &amp; Woottiluk, P . A systematic review of randomized controlled trials of bupropion versus methylphenidate in the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. T reat. 10 , 1439-1449 (2014).
- 170 . Wilens, T . E., Spencer, T ., Biederman, J., Wozniak, J. &amp; Connor, D. Combined pharmacotherapy: an emerging
- trend in pediatric psychopharmacology. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 34 , 110-112 (1995).
- 171 . Schoenfelder, E. N., Faraone, S. V. &amp; Kollins, S. H. Stimulant treatment of ADHD and cigarette smoking: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 133 , 1070-1080 (2014).
- 172 . Biederman, J. et al. Stimulant therapy and risk for subsequent substance use disorders in male adults with ADHD: a naturalistic controlled 10-year follow-up study. Am. J. Psychiatry 165 , 597-603 (2008). This study is among the largest longitudinal studies documenting the absence of increased risk of substance use disorders associated with stimulants in ADHD.
- 173 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Wilens, T . Does stimulant treatment lead to substance use disorders? J. Clin. Psychiatry 64 , 9-13 (2003).
- 174 . Groenman, A. P. et al. Stimulant treatment for ADHD reduces risk for developing substance use disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry 203 , 112-119 (2013).
- 175 . Chang, Z. et al. Stimulant ADHD medication and risk for substance abuse. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 55 , 878-885 (2014).
- 176 . Wilens, T . et al. Misuse and diversion of stimulants prescribed for ADHD: a systematic review of the literature. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 47 , 21-31 (2008).
- 177 . Bangs, M. E. et al. Efficacy and safety of atomoxetine in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and major depression. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 17 , 407-420 (2007).
- 178 . Kratochvil, C. J. et al. Atomoxetine alone or combined with fluoxetine for treating ADHD with comorbid depressive or anxiety symptoms. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 44 , 915-924 (2005). This study is among the first to document the use of atomoxetine in the management of children with ADHD and co-morbid anxiety.
- 179 . Rizzo, R., Gulisano, M., Cali, P . V. &amp; Curatolo, P . Tourette syndrome and comorbid ADHD: current pharmacological treatment options. Eur. J. Paediatr. Neurol. 17 , 421-428 (2013).
- 180 . Maneeton, N., Maneeton, B., Srisurapanont, M. &amp; Martin, S. D. Bupropion for adults with attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 65 , 611-617 (2011).
- 181 . Connor, D. F., Glatt, S. J., Lopez, I. D., Jackson, D. &amp;  Melloni, R. H. Jr. Psychopharmacology and aggression. I: a meta-analysis of stimulant effects on overt/covert aggression-related behaviors in ADHD. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 41 , 253-261 (2002).

,

- 182 . Connor, D. F. et al. Effects of guanfacine extended release on oppositional symptoms in children aged 6-12 years with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and oppositional symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. CNS Drugs 24 755-768 (2010).
- 183 . Newcorn, J. H., Spencer, T . J., Biederman, J., Milton, D. R. &amp; Michelson, D. Atomoxetine treatment in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and comorbid oppositional defiant disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 44 , 240-248 (2005).
- 184 . Simonoff, E. et al. Randomized controlled double-blind trial of optimal dose methylphenidate in children and adolescents with severe attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and intellectual disability. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 54 , 527-535 (2013).
- 185 . Levin, H. et al. Symptoms of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder following traumatic brain injury in children. J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 28 , 108-118 (2007).
- 186 . Shaywitz, B. A., Williams, D. W., Fox, B. K. &amp; Wietecha, L. A. Reading outcomes of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and dyslexia following atomoxetine treatment. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 24 , 419-425 (2014).
- 187 . Biederman, J. et al. Effects of stimulant medication on neuropsychological functioning in young adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Clin. Psychiatry 69 , 1150-1156 (2008).
- 188 . Faraone, S. V. et al. Atomoxetine and Stroop task performance in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 15 , 664-670 (2005).
- 189 . Langberg, J. M. et al. Patterns and predictors of adolescent academic achievement and performance in a sample of children with attention-deficit/
- hyperactivity disorder. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 40 , 519-531 (2011).
- 190 . Ghuman, J. K. &amp; Ghuman, H. S. Pharmacologic intervention for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in preschoolers: is it justified? Paediatr. Drugs 15 , 1-8 (2013).
- 191 . Sonuga-Barke, E. J. et al. Nonpharmacological interventions for ADHD: systematic review and metaanalyses of randomized controlled trials of dietary and psychological treatments. Am. J. Psychiatry 170 , 275-289 (2013).
- This comprehensive article uses meta-analysis to document the relative efficacy of nonpharmacological interventions for ADHD. It shows that efficacy measures from poorly blinded studies markedly overestimate the efficacy of treatments.
- 192 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Antshel, K. M. T owards an evidencebased taxonomy of nonpharmacologic treatments for ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 965-972 (2014).
- 193 . Stevenson, J. et al. Research review: the role of diet in the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder - an appraisal of the evidence on efficacy and recommendations on the design of future studies. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 55 , 416-427 (2014).
- 194 . Nigg, J. T . &amp; Holton, K. Restriction and elimination diets in ADHD treatment. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 937-953 (2014).
- 195 . Pfiffner, L. J. &amp; Haack, L. M. Behavior management for school-aged children with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 731-746 (2014).
- 196 . Wells, K. C. et al. Parenting and family stress treatment outcomes in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): an empirical analysis in the MTA study. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 28 , 543-553 (2000).
- 197 . Evans, S. W., Langberg, J. M., Egan, T . &amp; Molitor, S. J. Middle school-based and high school-based interventions for adolescents with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 699-715 (2014).
- 198 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Antshel, K. M. ADHD: nonpharmacologic interventions. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , xiii-xiv (2014). This issue reviews the clinical methodology and data that support efficacy for the following non-pharmacological interventions for ADHD: cognitive-behavioural therapy, family therapy, psychotherapy, social skills training, behavioural management, working memory training, neurofeedback, lifestyle interventions, traditional Chinese medicine, restriction and food colour exclusion diets and herbal and nutritional products.
- 199 . Daley, D. et al. Behavioral interventions in attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials across multiple outcome domains. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 53 , 835-847.e5 (2014).
- 200 . Mikami, A. Y., Jia, M. &amp; Na, J. J. Social skills training. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 775-788 (2014).
- 201 . Abikoff, H. et al. Remediating organizational functioning in children with ADHD: immediate and long-term effects from a randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 81 , 113-128 (2013).
- 202 . DuPaul, G. J., Gormley, M. J. &amp; Laracy, S. D. School-based interventions for elementary school students with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 687-697 (2014).
- 203 . Antshel, K. M. &amp; Olszewski, A. K. Cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 825-842 (2014).
- 204 . Safren, S. A. Cognitive-behavioral approaches to ADHD treatment in adulthood. J. Clin. Psychiatry 67 (Suppl. 8), 46-50 (2006).
- 205 . Knouse, L. E. &amp; Safren, S. A. Current status of cognitive behavioral therapy for adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 33 , 497-509 (2010).
- 206 . Seidman, L. J. Neuropsychologically informed strategic psychotherapy in teenagers and adults with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 843-852 (2014).
- 207 . Robin, A. L. Family therapy for adolescents with ADHD. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 747-756 (2014).
- 208 . Arns, M., de Ridder, S., Strehl, U., Breteler, M. &amp; Coenen, A. Efficacy of neurofeedback treatment in ADHD: the effects on inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity: a meta-analysis. Clin. EEG Neurosci. 40 , 180-189 (2009).

<!-- image -->

## PRIMER

- 209 . Holtmann, M., Sonuga-Barke, E., Cortese, S. &amp; Brandeis, D. Neurofeedback for ADHD: a review of current evidence. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 789-806 (2014).
- 210 . Sonuga-Barke, E., Brandeis, D., Holtmann, M. &amp; Cortese, S. Computer-based cognitive training for ADHD: a review of current evidence. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 23 , 807-824 (2014).
- 211 .  Klingberg, T . et al. Computerized training of working memory in children with ADHD - a randomized, controlled trial. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 44 , 177-186 (2005).
- 212 . Bogels, S. M., de Bruin, E. L. &amp; van der Oord, S. in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Children and Families 3rd edn (eds Graham, P. &amp; Reynolds, S.) 371-384 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013).
- 213 . Groenman, A. P. et al. Substance use disorders in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a 4-year follow-up study. Addiction 108 , 1503-1511 (2013).
- 214 . Lichtenstein, P . et al. Medication for attention deficithyperactivity disorder and criminality. N. Engl. J. Med. 367 , 2006-2014 (2012). This very large population study found an association of ADHD with criminal behaviour and that medications for ADHD reduce such behaviour.
- 215 . Cortese, S., Faraone, S. V., Bernardi, S., Wang, S. &amp; Blanco, C. Adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and obesity: epidemiological study. Br. J. Psychiatry 203 , 24-34 (2013).
- 216 . Biederman, J. &amp; Faraone, S. V. The effects of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder on employment and household income. MedGenMed 8 , 12 (2006).
- 217 . Chang, Z., Lichtenstein, P ., D'Onofrio, B. M., Sjolander, A. &amp; Larsson, H. Serious transport accidents in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the effect of medication: a populationbased study. JAMA Psychiatry 71 , 319-325 (2014).
- 218 . James, A., Lai, F. H. &amp; Dahl, C. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and suicide: a review of possible associations. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 110 , 408-415 (2004).
- 219 . Biederman, J. et al. Patterns of psychiatric comorbidity, cognition, and psychosocial functioning in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 150 , 1792-1798 (1993).
- 220 . Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L. &amp; Fletcher, K. Young adult outcome of hyperactive children: adaptive functioning in major life activities. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 45 , 192-202 (2006).
- 221 . Biederman, J. et al. Young adult outcome of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a controlled 10-year follow-up study. Psychol. Med. 36 , 167-179 (2006).
- 222 . Ramos Olazagasti, M. A. et al. Does childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder predict risktaking and medical illnesses in adulthood? J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 52 , 153-162.e4 (2013).
- 223 . Klein, R. G. et al. Clinical and functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 33 years later. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69 , 1295-1303 (2012).
- 224 . Dalsgaard, S., Ostergaard, S. D., Leckman, J. F., Mortensen, P. B. &amp; Pedersen, M. G. Mortality in children, adolescents, and adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a nationwide cohort study. Lancet 385 , 2190-2196 (2015).
- 225 . Danckaerts, M. et al. The quality of life of children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 19 , 83-105 (2010).

This review of 36 studies found that ADHD is associated with lower HRQOL across a broad range of psychosocial, achievement and self-evaluation domains. The effect of ADHD on HRQOL was similar to that of other mental health conditions and severe physical disorders. Higher numbers of ADHD symptoms and impairments predicted poorer HRQOL.

- 226 . Riley, A. W. et al. Factors related to health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among children with ADHD in Europe at entry into treatment. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 15 (Suppl. 1), I38-I45 (2006).
- 227 . Agarwal, R., Goldenberg, M., Perry, R. &amp; William Ishak, W. The quality of life of adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review. Innov. Clin. Neurosci. 9 , 10-21 (2012).
- 228 . Brod, M., Pohlman, B., Lasser, R. &amp; Hodgkins, P. Comparison of the burden of illness for adults with
- ADHD across seven countries: a qualitative study. Health Qual. Life Outcomes 10 , 47 (2012).
- 229 . Caci, H. et al. Daily life impairments associated with childhood/adolescent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder as recalled by adults: results from the European Lifetime Impairment Survey. CNS Spectr. 20 , 112-121 (2015).
- 230 . Coghill, D. The impact of medications on quality of life in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review. CNS Drugs 24 , 843-866 (2010).
- 231 . Barbaresi, W. J., Katusic, S. K., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L. &amp; Jacobsen, S. J. Modifiers of long-term school outcomes for children with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder: does treatment with stimulant medication make a difference? Results from a population-based study. J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 28 , 274-287 (2007).
- 232 . Ljung, T ., Chen, Q., Lichtenstein, P . &amp; Larsson, H. Common etiological factors of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and suicidal behavior: a population-based study in sweden. JAMA Psychiatry 71 , 958-964 (2014).
- 233 . Man, K. K. et al. Methylphenidate and the risk of trauma. Pediatrics 135 , 40-48 (2015).
- 234 . Perwien, A. R. et al. Atomoxetine treatment in children and adolescents with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: what are the long-term healthrelated quality-of-life outcomes? J. Child Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 16 , 713-724 (2006).
- 235 . Hechtman, L. et al. Academic achievement and emotional status of children with ADHD treated with long-term methylphenidate and multimodal psychosocial treatment. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 43 , 812-819 (2004).
- 236 . Banaschewski, T. et al. Health-related quality of life and functional outcomes from a randomizedwithdrawal study of long-term lisdexamfetamine dimesylate treatment in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. CNS Drugs 28 , 1191-1203 (2014).
- 237 . Collins, P . Y. et al. Grand challenges in global mental health. Nature 475 , 27-30 (2011).
- 238 . Gelernter, J. Genetics of complex traits in psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry 77 , 36-42 (2015).
- 239 . Sagvolden, T., Russell, V. A., Aase, H., Johansen, E. B. &amp; Farshbaf, M. Rodent models of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 57 , 1239-1247 (2005).
- 240 . Norton, W. H. Toward developmental models of psychiatric disorders in zebrafish. Front. Neural Circuits 7 , 79 (2013).
- 241 . van der Voet, M., Harich, B., Franke, B. &amp; Schenck, A. ADHD-associated dopamine transporter, latrophilin and neurofibromin share a dopamine-related locomotor signature in Drosophila . Mol. Psychiatry http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/mp.2015.55 (2015).

This paper suggests that the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster , can clarify biological pathways from gene to disease in ADHD. As this animal model enables fast, cheap and scalable investigations of gene function at several levels from molecule to cell to behaviour, and is also amenable to drug testing, it may provide a powerful model for the evaluation of gene-to-disease pathways and new candidate pharmacological treatments for ADHD. Such high-throughput models will be needed to discover new treatments.

- 242 . Brennand, K. J. et al. Modelling schizophrenia using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 473 , 221-225 (2011).
- 243 . Thompson, P. M. et al. The ENIGMA Consortium: large-scale collaborative analyses of neuroimaging and genetic data. Brain Imaging Behav. 8 , 153-182 (2014).
- 244 . Kooij, J. J. et al. Internal and external validity of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in a population-based sample of adults. Psychol. Med. 35 , 817-827 (2005).
- 245 . Sanislow, C. A. et al. Developing constructs for psychopathology research: research domain criteria. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 119 , 631-639 (2010).
- 246 . Thome, J. et al. Biomarkers for attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). A consensus report of the WFSBP task force on biological markers and the World Federation of ADHD. World J. Biol. Psychiatry 13 , 379-400 (2012).
- 247 . Peng, X., Lin, P ., Zhang, T . &amp; Wang, J. Extreme learning machine-based classification of ADHD using brain structural MRI data. PLoS ONE 8 , e79476 (2013).
- 248 . Edden, R. A., Crocetti, D., Zhu, H., Gilbert, D. L. &amp; Mostofsky, S. H. Reduced GABA concentration in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69 , 750-753 (2012).
- 249 . Oades, R. D., Slusarek, M., Velling, S. &amp; Bondy, B. Serotonin platelet-transporter measures in childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): clinical versus experimental measures of impulsivity. World J. Biol. Psychiatry 3 , 96-100 (2002).
- 250 . Faraone, S. V. &amp; Zhang-James, Y. Can sodium/ hydrogen exchange inhibitors be repositioned for treating attention deficit hyperactivity disorder? An in silico approach. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet. 162B , 711-717 (2013).
- 251 . Adler, L. D. &amp; Nierenberg, A. A. Review of medication adherence in children and adults with ADHD. Postgrad. Med. 122 , 184-191 (2010).
- 252 . Lurie, J. D. &amp; Morgan, T . S. Pros and cons of pragmatic clinical trials. J. Comp. Eff. Res. 2 , 53-58 (2013).
- 253 . Biederman, J., Petty, C. R., O'Connor, K. B., Hyder, L. L. &amp; Faraone, S. V. Predictors of persistence in girls with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: results from an 11-year controlled follow-up study. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 125 , 147-156 (2012).
- 254 . Holmes, J. et al. The child attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder teacher telephone interview (CHATTI): reliability and validity. Br. J. Psychiatry 184 , 74-78 (2004).
- 255 . Ward, M. F., Wender, P. H. &amp; Reimherr, F. W. The Wender Utah Rating Scale: an aid in the retrospective diagnosis of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 150 , 885-890 (1993).

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank M. Mehta for help with incorporating the default mode network into Figure 4.  S.V.F. is supported by the K.G. Jebsen Centre for Research on Neuropsychiatric Disorders, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, the European Commission's Seventh Framework programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 602805 and National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) grants R13MH059126 and R01MH094469. J.B. is supported by grants from the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development (ZonMw 60-60600-97-193), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO; grants 1750102007010, 433-09-242 and 056-13-015), and by the European Commission's Seventh Framework programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 278948 (TACTICS), 602450 (IMAGEMEND), 602805 (AGGRESSOTYPE) and 603016 (MATRICS); and Horizon 2020 research programme (grant agreement no. 643051 (MiND) and 642996 (BRAINVIEW)). His research also receives funding from the US NIH Consortium grant no. U54 EB020403, supported by a cross-NIH alliance that funds Big Data to Knowledge Centers of Excellence. B.F. is supported by grants from NWO (grants no. 433-09-229 and 016-130-669), from the European Commission's Seventh Framework programme (grant agreement no. 278948 (TACTICS), 602450 (IMAGEMEND) and 602805 (Aggressotype)); and Horizon 2020 research programme (grant agreement no. 643051 (MiND)). Her research also receives funding from the NIH Consortium grant no. U54 EB020403, supported by a cross-NIH alliance that funds Big Data to Knowledge Centers of Excellence. J.A.R.-Q. is supported by grants from and Departament de Salut, Government of Catalonia, Spain, Instituto de Salud Carlos III-FIS (PI12/01139), Plan Nacional Sobre Drogas (PNSD2011/0080) and the European Commission's Seventh Framework programme. R.T. is supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR #245899) and the Institute of Education Sciences (R305A120184). L.A.R. is supported by a grant from the National Counsel of Technological and Scientific Development - CNPq (grant no. 304678/2010-4). E.J.S.S.-B. is supported by grants from the Economic Social Research Council (ES/I037970/1), Medical Research Council (MR/ K022474/1), National Institute for Health Research (NIHR PGfAR - RP-PG-0108-10061), MQ Transforming Mental Health (MQ14PP\_83), European Commission's Seventh Framework programme (2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 260576 and an unrestricted p  rogramme grant from Shire Pharmaceuticals.

## Author contributions

Introduction (S.V.F.); Epidemiology (L.A.R.); Mechanisms/ pathophysiology (P .A., J.K.B. and S.V.F .); Diagnosis, screening and prevention (R.T., J.A.R.-Q., S.V.F. and E.J.S.S.-B.); Management (J.B. and E.J.S.S.-B.); Quality of life (T.B.); Outlook (B.F. and S.V.F.); Overview of Primer (S.V.F.). Aside from the first and last author, authorship is alphabetical. All authors extensively commented on each other's sections.

## Competing interests

S.V.F. has received income, travel expenses and/or research support from, and/or has been on an advisory board for, and/ or participated in continuing medical education programmes sponsored by: Pfizer, Ironshore, Shire, Akili Interactive Labs, CogCubed, Alcobra, VAYA Pharma, Neurovance, Impax, NeuroLifeSciences, Otsuka, McNeil, Janssen, Novartis, Eli Lilly and the US NIH. With his institution, S.V.F. has US patent US20130217707 A1 for the use of sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibitors in the treatment of ADHD. He receives royalties for books published by Guilford Press: Straight T alk about Your Child's Mental Health ; Oxford University Press: Schizophrenia: The Facts ;  and Elsevier: ADHD: NonPharmacologic Treatments . J.K.B. has been a consultant to, a member of an advisory board for, and/or speaker for: Janssen-Cilag BV, Eli Lilly, Shire, Lundbeck, Roche and Servier. He receives research support from the NIH, the European Commission's Seventh Framework programme, the Marie Curie programme and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). R.T. is an advisory board member for, has served as consultant for, received travel awards from, and/or received software licenses from: the Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance (CADDRA), Shire, Purdue, the Ministry of Education of Newfoundland and Labrador, BioMed Central and Pearson-Cogmed. She receives authorship royalties from Springer and Cambridge University Press. E.J.S.S.-B. has received speaker fees, consultancy, research funding and/or conference support from: Shire, Janssen-Cilag, Neurotech solutions, Medice and the Universities of Leuven, Aarhus and Copenhagen. He has received book royalties from Oxford University Press and Jessica Kingsley, the latter related to the New Forest Parenting Programme. T.B. has served in an advisory or consultancy role for, received conference support from, received speakers' fees from, and/or been involved in clinical trials sponsored by: Hexal Pharma, Eli Lilly, Medice, Novartis, Otsuka, Oxford outcomes, PCM Scientific, Shire and Vifor Pharma. The present work is unrelated to the above grants and relationships. J.B. has received research support or honoraria from: The US Department of Defense, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP), Alcobra, Forest Research Institute, Ironshore, Lundbeck, Magceutics Inc., Merck, PamLab, Pfizer, Shire, SPRITES, Sunovion, Vaya Pharma/Enzymotec, Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) Psychiatry Academy, American Professional Society of ADHD and Related Disorders (APSARD), ElMindA, McNeil and the NIH. He has a US patent application pending (Provisional number #61/233,686) through MGH corporate licensing on a method to prevent stimulant abuse. He has received departmental royalties from a copyrighted rating

<!-- image -->

scale used for ADHD diagnoses, paid by Ingenix, Prophase, Shire, Bracket Global, Sunovion and Theravance; these royalties were paid to the Department of Psychiatry at MGH. J.A.R.-Q. has been on the speakers' bureau for, acted as consultant for and/or received travel awards from: Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Shire, Lundbeck, Ferrer and Rubió in the past 3 years. The ADHD Program chaired by him received unrestricted educational and research support from the following pharmaceutical companies in the past 3 years: Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Shire, Rovi and Rubió. B.F. has received speaker fees from Merz. L.A.R. has been on the speakers' bureau for, on the advisory board for, received travel grants from and/or acted as a consultant for: Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis and Shire in the past 3 years. He receives authorship royalties from Oxford University Press and ArtMed. The ADHD and Juvenile Bipolar Disorder Outpatient Programs chaired by him received unrestricted educational and research support from the following pharmaceutical companies in the past 3 years: Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis and Shire. P.A. has been on the speakers' bureau for, on the advisory board for and/or has received unrestricted educational and research awards from: Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Shire, Qbtech, Vifor Pharma, GW Pharmaceuticals, PCM Scientific and Eli Lilly. All fees related to these activities are paid to Kings College London.