## Mission Statement

Advancing the science of pediatric mental health and promoting the care of youth and their families

Although any transition has its moments of anxiety, optimism, nostalgia, and enthusiasm, it can also be a time to reflect on the enduring elements that link past, present, and future. In an effort to capture such elements, the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry has started publishing a new mission statement on the cover and masthead of this issue.

The Journal has always advocated for youths and their families and has always sought to advance the science of pediatric mental health. Explicitly adding this mission statement at this time serves three purposes: to remind us of what we have always stood for, to inspire us in our task, and to guide us in our future endeavors. Placing this statement in every issue of the Journal does not indicate that we can take it for granted or even assume that we know exactly what it means. In fact, because it is there, it should serve as a constant reminder that we still have much to learn about the science of our field and about how to provide care for our patients and their families in the communities and world in which they live.

There are a great many questions that are asked of our field, and some of them need to be answered urgently. Science is not a fixed body of knowledge or a bedrock of certainty: it is a developing practice, based on principles such as hypothesis generation and testing, transparency, reproducibility, falsifiability, and on the mutual responsibilities of acknowledgment and originality. In medicine, science is imbued with a special pairing of ethical demands: ethical treatment of subjects, and an ethical obligation to pursue research so that errors of the past will not continue for want of thoughtful critique. Without thinking about what these statements mean, the practice of our science will not evolve, and our ability to answer those essential questions about the nature, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of mental disorders in children and adolescents will be limited.

However beautiful and elegant it may be, science is usually not judged on aesthetic grounds but functional ones. The ultimate function of the Journal is to promote the mental health of the children, adolescents, and families whom we serve. Science is essential to that goal by investigating our practices, developing new ones, refining the ones we have, explaining the natural history of mental illness, and contributing to our knowledge about the mysteries of human development. But science does not exist in a vacuum. The world of clinical practice V of daily engagement with children, adolescents, and families in clinics, schools, hospitals, and offices V draws on more than can possibly be studied in a research setting (indeed, a research setting often, but not always, excludes exactly those variables that make a clinical setting a clinical setting). B Translation [ is the new catchphrase, the B bless you [ to evidence-based medicine \_ s sneeze. It is a primary goal of the Journal to demonstrate that translation is a two-way street based on dialogue between the clinical- and the research-oriented members of our community. Reflecting this view, and broadening the scope of the dialogue, the Journal will be including scholarly works on health policy and economics, on the fundamental causes of disease, and on those special cultural aspects of childhood that vary with every generation just enough to be not quite familiar to adults.

The challenge for the editorial team and the reader alike will be to form bridges between the two parts of the mission statement, ones that echo Karl Jaspers' distinction between explanation and understanding. Only by doing so will we be able to advance the science of pediatric mental health and promote the care of youths and their families in the years to come.

Andre ´s Martin, M.D., M.P.H., Stephen V. Faraone, Ph.D., Schuyler W. Henderson, M.D., James J. Hudziak, M.D., Ellen Leibenluft, M.D., John Piacentini, Ph.D., Bradley Stein, M.D., Ph.D., Richard Todd, Ph.D., M.D., John Walkup, M.D.

DOI: 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815aac61

Disclosure: Dr. Faraone receives research support from, is on the speakers' bureaus of, and has had an advisory or cosulting relationship with McNeil Pediatrics and Shire Laboratories; he also has had an advisory or consulting relationship with Novartis and Eli Lilly. Dr. Stein receives grants/research support from Pfizer. Dr. Walkup receives grant/research support from Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and Cephalon; and has received honoraria from and been on the speakers' bureaus of Eli Lilly and Pfizer. Drs. Martin, Henderson, Hudziak, Leibenluft, Piacentini, and Todd report no conflicts of interest.