## ADHD, Substance Use Disorders, and Psychostimulant Treatment

## Current Literature and Treatment Guidelines

Scott H. Kollins

Duke University Medical Center

Objective: This review explores the relationship between ADHD and substance use disorder (SUD), factors that determine the abuse potential of psychostimulants, and strategies for identifying and treating at-risk ADHD patients. Method: This study uses a Medline review of literature. Results: Psychostimulants, such as methylphenidate and amphetamines, are effective firstline pharmacotherapy for ADHD and when used appropriately in individuals with ADHD do not appear to be frequently abused by patients. Diversion and misuse of prescription stimulants are growing concerns, especially among young adults and college students. Short-acting psychostimulant formulations may have higher potential for abuse, misuse, and diversion, but more data are needed to substantiate this observation. Nonstimulant treatments for ADHD may be considered for patients at particularly high risk for substance use, misuse, or diversion of stimulants. Conclusion: In treating patients with ADHD and comorbid substance use, psychostimulants may be a useful pharmacologic alternative. However, the risks of such treatment with high-risk populations must be considered alongside potential benefits. (J. of Att. Dis. 2008; 12(2) 115-125)

Keywords: ADHD; substance-related disorders; central nervous system stimulants; psychopharmacology

A DHD is among the most common of the neurobehavioral  disorders,  affecting  an  estimated  7.8%  of children  aged  4  to  17  years  and  4.4%  of  adults  in  the United States (Faraone &amp; Biederman, 2004; Kessler et al., 2006).  ADHD  often  warrants  continuous  treatment, given  that  it  is  linked  to  significant  functional  impairments in school and work settings and in personal life (Barkley,  2004;  Biederman,  Faraone,  et  al.,  2006). Psychostimulants  such  as  methylphenidate  (MPH)  and mixed amphetamine salts (MAS) are the recommended first-line pharmacotherapy for children, adolescents, and adults (Greenhill et al., 2002); lisdexamfetamine dimesylate,  a  recently  approved  long-acting  formulation  for children  with  ADHD,  is  a  prodrug  of d -amphetamine that is comparable in efficacy to extended-release MAS (Biederman,  Boellner,  Childress,  Lopez,  &amp;  Krishnan, 2006). However, despite its proven efficacy, psychostimulant use for ADHD has been controversial, particularly with respect to the risk of misuse and abuse of prescribed stimulants  and  the  extent  to  which  stimulant  treatment may be associated with subsequent substance-use problems  (Greenhill  et  al.,  2002;  Wilens,  Gignac,  Swezey, Monuteaux, &amp; Biederman, 2006).

Psychostimulants  used  for  the  treatment  of  ADHD (e.g.,  MPH,  amphetamine)  have  a  clearly  established potential for abuse, with animal and human studies consistently demonstrating that MPH and amphetamine produce reinforcing effects that are similar to each other and to  those  of  drugs  of  abuse,  such  as  cocaine  (Kollins, 2003; Kollins, MacDonald, &amp; Rush, 2001). Moreover, it has been established that the risk of substance use disorder (SUD) among patients with ADHD is high (Biederman et al., 1995; Flory, Milich, Lynam, Leukefeld, &amp; Clayton, 2003; McGough et al., 2005) and that SUDs in patients with ADHD tend to emerge at an earlier age and to follow a more aggressive course (Schubiner et al., 2000; Wilens, Biederman, Mick, Faraone, &amp; Spencer, 1997).

Given these  facts,  clinicians  who  treat  patients  with ADHD are faced with several important questions when

Author's  Note: The  author  would  like  to  acknowledge  Karen Dougherty for her assistance in the preparation of this article. The preparation  of  this  article  was  supported  by  funding  from  Shire. Address  correspondence  to  Scott  H.  Kollins,  Duke  University Medical  Center,  718  Rutherford  St.,  Durham,  NC  27705;  phone: (919) 416-2098; e-mail: kolli001@mc.duke.edu.

Journal of Attention Disorders

Volume 12 Number 2 September 2008  115-125 ' 2008 Sage Publications 10.1177/1087054707311654 http://jad.sagepub.com hosted at http://online.sagepub.com

Table 1 Cumulative Lifetime Morbidity Risks and Hazard Ratios for Psychiatric Disorders in ADHD Patients Versus Controls

|                                | Morbidity Risks (95% Confidence Interval)   | Morbidity Risks (95% Confidence Interval)   |              |         |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|--------------|---------|
| Psychiatric Disorder           | Control Probands ( n = 120)                 | ADHD Probands ( n = 140)                    | Hazard Ratio | p Value |
| Substance dependence disorders |                                             |                                             |              |         |
| Nicotine dependence            | .21 (.14, .30)                              | .43 (.35, .53)                              | 2.7          | < .001  |
| Alcohol dependence             | .16 (.10, .25)                              | .29 (.21, .39)                              | 2.3          | .009    |
| Drug dependence                | .10 (.05, .17)                              | .21 (.14, .30)                              | 2.2          | .036    |
| Antisocial disorders           |                                             |                                             |              |         |
| Oppositional defiant disorder  | .20 (.14, .28)                              | .78 (.71, .85)                              | 7.2          | < .001  |
| Conduct disorder               | .16 (.10, .24)                              | .46 (.38, .55)                              | 3.6          | < .001  |
| Major psychiatric disorders    |                                             |                                             |              |         |
| Bipolar disorder a             | .03 (.01, .08)                              | .29 (.22, .38)                              | 7.9          | < .001  |
| Major depressive disorder b    | .07 (.04, .15)                              | .46 (.39, .56)                              | 7.2          | < .001  |
| Psychosis                      | .02 (.00, .07)                              | .08 (.04, .14)                              | 4.4          | .057    |

Source: Biederman, Monuteaux, et al. (2006). Adapted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

Note: All analyses adjusted for baseline socioeconomic status and baseline age.

a. Bipolar disorder with at least moderate impairment.

b. Major depression with severe impairment.

choosing a treatment strategy. Does stimulant treatment increase the risk of SUD? Which patients are at risk for comorbid  SUD?  Do  all  psychostimulants  have  similar abuse potential?  Furthermore,  the  relationship  between ADHD and SUD, the factors that determine the abuse potential  of  psychostimulants,  and  the  strategies  for identifying  and  treating  at-risk  ADHD  patients  are important concerns for clinicians in the management of this patient population.

## The Relationship Between ADHD and SUD

Prospective  longitudinal  studies  suggest  that  a  diagnosis  of ADHD  in  childhood  or  adolescence  increases the risk for SUD later in life (Biederman, Monuteaux, et  al., 2006; Mannuzza et al., 1991). In a cohort of 94 boys with ADHD followed for 8 to 14 years, Mannuzza and colleagues (1991) found that, at follow-up, a significantly greater proportion of the boys with ADHD had a diagnosed SUD (14%) compared to the normal controls (8%).  Similarly,  Biederman,  Monuteaux,  et  al.  (2006) showed that  individuals  diagnosed  with ADHD  during childhood were twice as likely as non-ADHD controls to have an SUD at a 10-year follow-up, as measured by hazard ratios, an estimate of overall relative risk (see Table 1).

Adolescents and adults with ADHD are more likely than those without ADHD to be diagnosed with a SUD (Biederman et al., 1995; Flory et al., 2003; Katusic et al., 2005; McGough et al., 2005). In a study of adolescents, those  with ADHD were 6.2  times  more  likely  to  have

SUD (21.9%) than were the matched controls  (4.4%, p &lt; .001; Katusic et al., 2005). In adults with persistent ADHD, the 47.0% rate of a comorbid SUD is significantly higher than the 38.0% rate in the matched controls (McGough et al., 2005).

Studies show that adolescents and adults who present for treatment of ongoing SUD are more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD than would be expected in community  samples  (Carroll  &amp;  Rounsaville,  1993;  Gordon, Tulak, &amp; Troncale, 2004). In one recent report, 34.0% of adolescents who were being treated for SUD had a lifetime  diagnosis  of  ADHD  (Gordon  et  al.,  2004).  This finding is similar to that of an earlier study of adults presenting  for  treatment  of  cocaine  addiction,  in  which 35.0% met the criteria for a diagnosis of ADHD (Carroll &amp; Rounsaville, 1993). These ADHD rates are substantially higher than the 4.4% incidence rate of ADHD reported in the adult U.S. population (Kessler et al., 2006).

Although the relationship between ADHD and SUD is not fully understood, it is clear that ADHD serves as an independent risk factor for SUD, even in the absence of other  comorbidity  (Biederman  et  al.,  1995;  Milberger, Biederman,  Faraone,  Wilens,  &amp;  Chu,  1997).  Evidence also suggests that other factors may further increase the risk  of  SUD  in  patients  with  ADHD.  These  factors include  the  presence  of  comorbid  disruptive  behavior disorders (e.g., oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder  [CD];  August  et  al.,  2006;  Barkley,  Fischer, Edelbrock,  &amp;  Smallish,  1990;  Biederman  et  al.,  1997; Katusic et al., 2005; Mannuzza et al., 1991; McGough

Figure 1 Hypothetical Dopaminergic Synapse, Illustrating That Amphetamine Enhances the Release of Dopamine

<!-- image -->

Source: Koob (2000).

Note:  COMT = catechol-O-methyltransferase;  DA = dopamine; DOPA = 3,4,-dihyroxyphenylalamine; MAO = monoamine oxidase. Schematic drawing of a dopaminergic synapse illustrating sites for sympathomimetic drug action. Amphetamine blocks dopamine reuptake and enhances dopamine release, cocaine predominantly blocks dopamine reuptake, and reserpine blocks reuptake of amine into the storage  vesicles,  depleting  amine  stores.  Schematic  also  illustrates examples of agents that can directly access the receptor as agonists (apomorphine) or antagonists (haloperidol).

et al., 2005) and comorbid bipolar disorder (Biederman et al., 1997; Wilens et al., 1999). Among these factors, the  most  consistently  observed  predictive  factor  has been comorbid CD, which in some studies completely accounted  for  the  increased  prevalence  of  SUD  in individuals with ADHD (Barkley et al., 1990; McGough et al., 2005).

Flory and colleagues (2003) reported how comorbid ADHD and CD uniquely contribute to a virulent form of SUD, marked by  an  increased  risk  for  dependence  on 'hard drugs' and marijuana. Certain characteristics common  to  most  individuals  with  ADHD  and/or  CDincluding  impaired  executive  functions  and  behavioral control,  impulsivity,  and  peer  rejection-may  place patients with ADHD and CD at greater risk of developing SUD (Wilens, 2004). Such heightened vulnerability may reach the tipping point as development progresses; risk-taking behavior tends to increase in adolescence and early  adulthood  (Kelley,  Schochet,  &amp;  Landry,  2004; Spear, 2004), and reduced parental supervision can lead to  more  opportunities  for  substance  misuse  and  the development of abuse (DeVore &amp; Ginsburg, 2005).

## Differential Abuse Potential of Psychostimulants

ADHD is believed to be the result, in part, of aberrant dopamine function. In line with this theory, psychostimulants may be effective in treating ADHD because they increase extracellular dopamine concentration (Schiffer et al., 2006). MPH binds with the dopamine transporter, whereas  amphetamine  compounds  trigger  presynaptic dopamine  release  (see  Figure  1).  These  increases  in extracellular  dopamine  presumably  contribute  to  the alerting effects associated with stimulant use in patients with ADHD and in individuals without ADHD (Rapoport et  al.,  1980;  V olkow,  Fowler,  Wang,  Ding,  &amp;  Gatley, 2002). In addition, these drugs also increase central activation  of  mesolimbic  dopamine  'reward'  pathways  in the nucleus accumbens, an important common substrate of psychostimulants with abuse potential in humans (Di Chiara  &amp;  Imperato,  1988;  Koob  &amp;  Nestler,  1997). Consequently,  products  containing  MPH  and  amphetamine are classified as Schedule II controlled substances by the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Although the foregoing review highlights the effects of acute  psychostimulant  treatment  on  dopamine  function, there  may  be  important  differences  in  how  these  drugs affect dopamine levels and other brain functions following chronic administration. A recent review of the effects of chronic  amphetamine  administration  provides  evidence that chronic amphetamine exposure, even at clinically relevant doses, may result in considerable changes in brain morphology and function (Advokat, 2007).

Although psychostimulants such as MPH and amphetamine share  a  mechanism  of  action  that  is  common  to abused drugs, questions remain as to the neuropharmacologic mechanisms that contribute to the observed differences in abuse rates between oral stimulants used in the  treatment  of  ADHD  and  drugs  of  abuse,  such  as cocaine. A key factor in determining abuse potential is the ability of a compound to yield rapid absorption and increases  in  central  drug  concentrations  followed  by rapid clearance; such effects are most likely achieved via intravenous, intranasal, and inhaled routes of administration (Balster &amp; Schuster, 1973; Resnick, Kestenbaum, &amp; Schwartz, 1977; Volkow et al., 1995). For example, participants have reported that drugs such as cocaine produce euphoric effects when administered under conditions that enable quick absorption and rapid increases in central  synaptic  dopamine  concentrations  (Resnick  et  al., 1977; Volkow &amp; Swanson, 2003).

Whether  a  given  psychostimulant  yields  a  rapid on-off effect, however, is modulated by several factors, including  its  route  of  administration,  pharmacokinetic

Figure 2 Euphoria Following Intravenous Versus Oral Methylphenidate

<!-- image -->

Source: Volkow and Swanson (2003). Reprinted with the permission of American Journal of Psychiatry (Copyright 2003, American Psychiatric Association).

Note: Data represent self-reports from healthy adult volunteers obtained 5 minutes after intravenous administration and 60 minutes after oral administration  of  methylphenidate.  Although  oral  and  intravenous  methylphenidate  induced  equivalent  changes  in  dopamine,  oral methylphenidate did not induce a 'high.' However, for intravenous methylphenidate, the magnitude of the dopamine increases was associated with the intensity of the 'high.'

profile, and dose. Route of administration is perhaps the most important factor in modulating the timing and rate of  central  dopaminergic  increases;  intravenous  and intranasal administrations produce more rapid increases in  central  dopamine  concentrations  than  does  oral administration.  In  a  series  of  experiments,  Volkow demonstrated  that  although  oral  and  intravenous  MPH produced comparable changes in striatal dopamine concentration, oral MPH did not induce 'a high,' whereas intravenous MPH yielded a significant high (see Figure 2). This appears directly related to differences in the rate of  dopamine  changes,  which  were  much  faster  with intravenous administration (peak after 6 to 10 minutes) of MPH compared with oral administration (peak after 60  to  90  minutes;  V olkow  &amp;  Swanson,  2003).  These studies further show that the absolute level of dopamine does not appear relevant to producing a high, although it may affect the intensity of the high (Volkow et al., 1995; Volkow &amp; Swanson, 2003).

It should be noted, however, that a number of studies have shown that-even when administered orally-both MPH and amphetamine produce subjective and reinforcing effects suggestive of abuse potential (Kollins et al., 2001; Rush, Kollins, &amp; Pazzaglia, 1998). It is therefore important to keep in mind that although other routes of administration  are  likely  to  produce  more  pronounced effects,  oral  administration  of  these  stimulants  is  not benign with respect to abuse potential.

Pharmacokinetic  differences  among  stimulants  may also play a role in the differential abuse potential of these drugs.  For  example,  although  cocaine  and  MPH  are absorbed  at  comparable  rates,  MPH  is  cleared  much more slowly (Volkow et al., 1995), which may limit the frequency  of  self-administration  because  of  the  persistence of aversive side effects during the prolonged clearance interval (Volkow et al., 1995). Finally, the rate and timing of peak concentration achieved with administration of a drug also depends on its dose; a higher dose will deliver more drug centrally per unit of time than will a lower  dose,  yielding  a  more  rapid  peak  concentration and producing the euphoria sought by abusers (Coetzee, Kaminer, &amp; Morales, 2002; Volkow &amp; Swanson, 2003).

Drug  formulation  may  also  have  an  effect  on  abuse potential.  To  reduce  the  need  for  multiple  daily  doses,  a number  of  extended-release  formulations  of  MPH  and amphetamine  have  been  developed.  These  formulations typically are characterized by a slower rise in plasma concentrations over a longer duration and should, theoretically,

have a lower potential for abuse (Swanson et al., 2003). Two studies evaluated this hypothesis. In a comparison of  the  subjective  effects  of  immediate-release  (40  mg) MPH versus osmotic-release  (90  mg)  MPH  in  healthy volunteers,  Spencer  and  colleagues  (2006)  found  that average  peak  drug  concentrations  and  dopamine  transporter  blockade  were  comparable for the two formulations  but  that  both  were  reached  several  hours  earlier with  the  immediate-release  formulation.  Furthermore, significantly greater drug likeability ratings were obtained with the immediate-release compared with the osmoticrelease  formulation.  Similar  findings  were  described in a study by Kollins, Rush, Pazzaglia, and Ali (1998), in  which  the  behavioral  effects  of  immediate-  versus sustained-release MPH were compared in healthy adults. The immediate-release formulation produced subjective effects consistent with abuse potential (e.g., self-reported ratings  of  'like  drug,'  'drug  effects,'  'high,'  'good effects'), whereas the sustained-release formulation produced only transient increases in such subjective effects and ratings. Reports of this nature support the notion that both  the  overall  dose  and  the  rapidity  of  central dopamine changes are critical in determining the abuse potential of a given drug.

Most studies evaluating the abuse potential of MPH and amphetamine have been conducted in non-ADHD populations; however, there is some empirical evidence that stimulants act somewhat differently with respect to abuse potential in patients with ADHD. In two separate studies  of  adults  and  children  diagnosed  with ADHD, orally administered MPH failed to produce the characteristic increases in subjective ratings of abuse potential (e.g.,  'feel  like  talking,'  'energetic,'  'heart  beating fast'), despite patients' preferences for oral MPH over placebo  (Fredericks  &amp;  Kollins,  2004;  MacDonald  &amp; Kollins, 2005). These studies suggest that patient preferences for MPH may be related more to ADHD symptom relief  than  to  euphoria  or  other  markers  of  abuse potential.

Based  on  these  investigations,  it  may  be  concluded that  the  conditions  under  which  stimulants  are  used clinically-given to patients with ADHD in small oral doses-make them potentially less subject to abuse than cocaine or methamphetamine, which typically are administered via  other  routes  (Volkow,  2006;  Volkow  &amp; Swanson, 2003). Clinicians should be mindful, however, that even with proper use in appropriate patients, the risk of  abuse  is  not  eliminated  (Babcock  &amp;  Byrne,  2000; Johnston,  O'Malley,  Bachman,  &amp;  Schulenberg,  2004; Klein-Schwartz  &amp;  McGrath,  2003;  McCabe,  Knight, Teter, &amp; Wechsler, 2005; Wilens et al., 2006; Williams, Goodale, Shay-Fiddler, Gloster, &amp; Chang, 2004).

## Patterns of Prescription Psychostimulant Abuse, Misuse, and Diversion

Concerns  about  prescription  psychostimulant  abuse have  increased  during  the  past  15  years,  with  reports from poison control centers indicating that the number of cases involving intentional prescription stimulant misuse or abuse  increased  throughout  the  1990s  (KleinSchwartz  &amp;  McGrath,  2003).  According  to  Toxic Exposure Surveillance System data, in 1993 the number of preteen and adolescent cases reported to an average of 64 evaluated U.S. poison control centers for acute care resulting from intentional misuse or abuse of MPH was less  than  20;  in  1999,  there  were  more  than  150  such cases  (Klein-Schwartz  &amp;  McGrath,  2003).  However, some evidence from the 2005 National Survey on Drug Use  and  Health  (Substance  Abuse  and  Mental  Health Services  Administration,  Office  of  Applied  Studies, 2006)  suggests  that  prescription  stimulant  misuse  or abuse may be leveling off; from 2003 through 2005, the number of individuals reporting nonmedical use of prescription stimulants (excluding  methamphetamine) ranged between 1,436 and 1,474.

Although the problem is clearly recognized, it is not fully understood; we still are only beginning to gain an understanding  of  how  prescription  stimulants  are  misused and abused. Recent research indicates that the patterns  of  diversion,  misuse,  and  abuse  of  prescription stimulants differ from those observed with cocaine and methamphetamine. In the general population, the prevalence  of  nonmedical  prescription  stimulant  misuse  is somewhat lower than the rates of misuse for other illicit substances (Substance  Abuse and Mental Health Services  Administration,  Office  of  Applied  Studies, 2006).  The  2005  estimate  of  12-month  prevalence  of nonmedical  use  of  a  prescription  stimulant  (excluding methamphetamine)  in  the  United  States  was  approximately 0.6% of individuals aged 12 or younger years; in contrast,  the  12-month  prevalence  of  cocaine  use  was estimated to be 2.3%. Compared with the rates of misuse,  abuse,  and  diversion  of  other  prescription  drugs, however, stimulants are commonly  misused. For example, although the absolute rates of illicit prescription opiate use are higher than those for stimulants, the ratio of nonmedical to medical use of stimulants is considerably  higher  compared  to  the  ratio  for  opiates (McCabe, Teter, &amp; Boyd, 2006a).

A number of  studies  have  identified  specific  demographic characteristics that are risk factors for stimulant misuse  and  abuse.  The  problem  of  misuse  and  abuse tends to be concentrated among adolescents and young adults, including college students (McCabe et al., 2005).

Table 2 Prevalence of Substance Use and Illicit Use of Prescription Stimulants, by Age of Initiating Prescription Stimulant

|                                        | Odds Ratio            | Odds Ratio          | Odds Ratio           | Odds Ratio         | Odds Ratio                      |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|----------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------|
|                                        | 2-Week Binge Drinking | Monthly Alcohol Use | Annual Marijuana Use | Annual Cocaine Use | Past Year Illicit Stimulant Use |
| No prescribed stimulant ( n = 8,199)   | 1.00                  | 1.00                | 1.00                 | 1.00               | 1.00 ( n = 8,048)               |
| Elementary school initiation ( n = 65) | 0.69                  | 1.01                | 1.49                 | 2.42               | 1.72 ( n = 65)                  |
| Secondary school initiation ( n = 105) | 1.68*                 | 2.59**              | 1.98**               | 4.40***            | 3.14*** ( n = 99)               |
| College initiation ( n = 97)           | 1.07                  | 3.60**              | 4.30***              | 4.46***            | 7.51*** ( n = 95)               |

Source: McCabe, Teter, and Boyd (2006b). Adapted with the permission of Journal of Psychoactive Drugs .

Note: Odds ratios are adjusted for all other predictors in the model, and the reference group for each model is students who did not report medical use of stimulants for ADHD. All of the models also include gender, race, class year, living arrangement, fraternity or sorority membership, family income, religious affiliation, and grade point average.

* p &lt; .05. ** p &lt; .01. *** p &lt; .001.

In a large survey of U.S. college students ( N = 10,904), 4.1% reported nonmedical use of a prescription stimulant during the previous year (McCabe et al., 2005). In more recent Web-based surveys conducted by McCabe, Teter, and Boyd (2006b) and Teter, McCabe, LaGrange, Cranford, and Boyd (2006), 5.4% to 5.9% of respondents reported  nonmedical  stimulant  use  during  the  previous year. College students who engage in illicit prescription stimulant  use  predominantly  are  male,  are  Caucasian, have a grade point average less than 3.5, belong to social fraternities  or  sororities,  and  reside  off  campus  (apartment  or  fraternity  or  sorority  house;  McCabe  et  al., 2006b). In addition, unlike the mechanism for obtaining cocaine,  obtaining  nonmedical  prescription  stimulants does not usually involve the exchange of money for drug; rather, users report frequently obtaining illicit prescription stimulants from friends and peers who had been prescribed the medication (McCabe et al., 2006b).

In the McCabe et al. (2006b) survey, more than half (54%) of college student respondents with a prescription for  a  psychostimulant  drug  were  approached  to  divert their  medication.  Which  stimulants  are  used  nonmedically  most  often  in  the  college  population  is  unclear. One recent report indicated that immediate-release MAS was  the  stimulant  used  by  the  overwhelming  majority (75%)  of  students  who  reported  nonmedical  stimulant use  (Teter  et  al.,  2006);  earlier  studies,  however,  indicated  that  immediate-release  MPH  was  used  most  frequently  (Wilens  et  al.,  2006;  Williams  et  al.,  2004). However, despite the theory that extended-release stimulant  formulations  should  have  a  lower  potential  for abuse, no published studies have conclusively confirmed this finding in community samples.

Among individuals  with  a  diagnosis  of ADHD,  the age  at  which  psychostimulant  treatment  is  initiated appears  to  play  a  major  predictive  role  in  determining whether these patients will engage in nonmedical stimulant use. In the McCabe et al. (2006b) report on college student respondents who had been prescribed stimulants for the treatment of ADHD ( n = 287 of 9,161; 3.1%), the rates of nonmedical use diverged sharply between those students who had begun ADHD treatment in elementary school  and  those  who  had  begun  ADHD  treatment  in high school or college. Those who had been prescribed stimulant  medication  for  ADHD  during  elementary school ( n = 65) were not more likely to misuse or abuse a  stimulant  compared  to  the  general  population  of students who never had been prescribed a stimulant. In contrast, students who had initiated prescription stimulant treatment for ADHD in high school or college were 4  to  8  times  more  likely  to  report  stimulant  misuse  or abuse  compared  to  the  overall  population  of  college students who never had been prescribed a stimulant (see Table 2). The latter two subgroups ( n = 202) were also more likely to report binge drinking and the use of other illicit  drugs,  including  cocaine  and  ecstasy  (McCabe et al., 2006b). Such findings highlight the problem in a subpopulation  of  adolescents  and  young  adults  with ADHD who engage in polydrug use.

Several studies have attempted to identify the motives for  prescription  stimulant  misuse  and  abuse.  Results from a survey by Teter et al. (2006) indicate that among the 8.3% of college students who reported nonprescribed stimulant use, 31.0% reported using these stimulants to 'get  high.'  In  contrast,  the  misuse  of  stimulant  drugs among college students for 'performance enhancement' appears  to  be  more  common  than  their  misuse  to  'get high.' In this study, 65.2% of students reported the use of a stimulant to help them concentrate, 59.8% to help them study, and 47.5% to increase their alertness (Teter et al.,

Figure 3 Prevalence of Substance Use Disorder (SUD) Subtypes at 4-Year Follow-up, by ADHD Medication Status

<!-- image -->

Source: Biederman, Wilens, Mick, Spencer, and Faraone (1999). Note:  Multiple  logistic  regression  analysis  showed  that  untreated ADHD participants were at significantly increased risk for any SUD subtype at follow-up compared to non-ADHD control participants.

2006).  Participants  who  reported  the  use  of  stimulants for performance enhancement rather than to 'get high' or 'experimentation' were predominantly female African Americans. Moreover, most had begun nonmedical use during their college years.

Another  concerning  trend  in  college  students  is  the misuse  of  stimulants  concurrent  with  other  drugs  of abuse.  In  a  study  examining  patterns  of  polydrug  use, McCabe,  Cranford,  Morales,  and Young  (2006)  found that more than half of individuals (56.8%) who illicitly used  prescription  medications,  including  stimulants, reported  doing  so  simultaneously  with  alcohol.  These findings are consistent with those of another study that found  that  a  large  proportion  of  college  students  who reported  illicit  prescription  stimulant  use  did  so  while simultaneously  using  alcohol  (41.5%)  or  marijuana (44.9%; Barrett, Darredeau, &amp; Pihl, 2006).

## Minimizing the Risks of SUD in Patients With ADHD

Given that individuals with ADHD are at heightened risk for the development of SUD and that rates of psychostimulant  prescribing  have  increased  dramatically since 1990, concerns have been raised that stimulant treatment  somehow  increases  the  risk  of  SUD  (Huss  &amp; Lehmkuhl,  2002;  Lambert  &amp;  Hartsough,  1998).  The potential for development of SUD among patients on psychostimulant treatment for ADHD is grounded, at least in part, by findings from a large body of literature showing that  animals  exposed  to  stimulants-including  MPH, amphetamine,  and  cocaine-become  'sensitized,'  such that  subsequent  administration  results  in  more  robust behavioral  responses  (Piazza,  Deminiere,  le  Moal,  &amp; Simon, 1989, 1990; Robinson &amp; Becker, 1986; Woolverton, Cervo, &amp; Johanson, 1984). Furthermore, the mechanism  of  this  sensitization  has  been  invoked  to explain other findings-for example, that animals exposed to stimulant drugs are more prone to self-administer drugs of abuse later in life (Schenk &amp; Partridge, 1997).

The data in support of the contention that stimulant treatment may increase the risk for development of SUD in patients with ADHD are inconclusive; however, some reports  show  increased  risk  (Lambert  &amp;  Hartsough, 1998),  some  show  decreased  risk  (Biederman, Wilens, Mick, Spencer, &amp; Faraone, 1999; Mannuzza, Klein, &amp; Moulton, 2003; Wilens, Faraone, Biederman,  &amp; Gunawardene, 2003), and some show neither increased nor  decreased  risk  (Faraone,  Biederman,  Wilens,  &amp; Adamson,  2007).  Biederman  et  al.  (1999)  found  that treatment status influenced the likelihood of future SUDs in ADHD youth. They evaluated the incidence of SUDs in adolescent males with ADHD during a 4-year period and found that participants who were unmedicated had a significantly higher risk of subsequent SUD versus participants without ADHD or those who had received pharmacotherapy for the disorder (see Figure 3).

One  factor  that  may  account  for  the  discrepancy  in these  findings,  and  which  has  not  been  systematically reported  in  clinical  studies,  is  the  timing  of  stimulant exposure. Data from studies in both animals and humans suggest  that  the  timing  of  initiation  of  stimulant  treatment may play a role in mitigating the likelihood of a future  substance  use  problem.  For  instance,  studies  in rats  showed  that  preadolescent  treatment  with  MPH resulted in a decrease in the rewarding effects of cocaine during  adulthood  (Andersen,  Arvanitogiannis,  Pliakas, LeBlanc,  &amp;  Carlezon,  2002;  Mague,  Andersen,  &amp; Carlezon, 2005). In contrast, a study in which animals were exposed to stimulant drugs during adolescence or adulthood  showed  increases  in  end  points  associated with drug abuse (Brandon, Marinelli, &amp; White, 2003).

Some clinical data suggest that a similar relationship between the timing of stimulant exposure and the development  of  SUD  may  exist  in  humans  (McCabe  et  al., 2006b). As noted above, McCabe and colleagues (2006b)

found that college students who had initiated prescription stimulant treatment for ADHD in high school or college  were  more  likely  to  report  misuse  or  abuse  of  a stimulant  compared  to  those  who  never  had  been  prescribed a stimulant. In contrast, students who had initiated stimulant treatment in elementary school exhibited rates of nonmedical stimulant use, and use of other substances, that were similar to those seen in their counterparts  who  never  had  been  prescribed  a  stimulant (McCabe et al., 2006b).

Related to this issue is the question of the impact of stimulant  drug  treatment  in  patients  diagnosed  with comorbid ADHD and SUD. Several studies have shown that ADHD can be successfully treated with stimulants in  ADHD  patients  with  concurrent  SUD  without  concomitantly  affecting  patterns  of  drug  use  (Castaneda, Levy, Hardy, &amp; Trujillo, 2000; Levin, Evans, McDowell, &amp; Kleber, 1998; Schubiner et al., 2002). In uncontrolled studies, some patients with ADHD given stimulant treatment not only experienced improved ADHD symptoms but also exhibited diminished substance abuse (Castaneda et al., 2000; Levin et al., 1998). In one such study, an algorithmic approach-which employed fluoxetine  first,  then  bupropion,  pemoline,  and  long-acting stimulants, and finally methamphetamine-was used in patients with ADHD and comorbid cocaine addiction in partial  or  full  remission  (Castaneda  et  al.,  2000).  The authors of this study found that during a 1-year course of treatment, long-acting stimulants were the most effective for  managing  ADHD  symptoms  in  cocaine-addicted adults; however, the researchers cautioned that treatment with a stimulant before obtaining at least partial remission of cocaine dependence may lead to a misdiagnosis of ADHD or exacerbation  of ADHD  symptoms.  More recently,  a  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study  of MPH  in  cocaine-abusing  adults  with  ADHD  showed that-with up to 12 weeks of treatment-MPH significantly  improved  ADHD  symptoms  (Schubiner  et  al., 2002). Although most participants in both groups continued to use cocaine throughout the study, participants in the MPH group showed no evidence of poor treatment compliance,  increased  cocaine  use,  or  drug  craving (Schubiner et al., 2002). In a similar controlled study of low-dose MPH treatment of inpatients with ADHD and a comorbid  SUD,  MPH  yielded  only  marginal  improvements in ADHD symptoms that did not reach statistical significance  compared  with  placebo  (Carpentier,  de Jong, Dijkstra, Verbrugge, &amp; Krabbe, 2005). These studies  suggest  that  stimulants  may  be  safely  used  in  this high-risk population-and in some cases with success.

When  undertaking  stimulant  treatment  in  patients with  a  high  risk  or  history  of  substance  abuse,  several elements  are  key  to  ensuring  their  safety  and  to  minimizing  the  risk  of  re-emerging  abuse  or  an  otherwise poor outcome. An important adjunct to treatment in each of  the  studies  discussed  above  in  patients  with ADHD and  comorbid  SUD  was  the  addition  of  concomitant behavioral  therapy  or  psychotherapy  (Castaneda  et  al., 2000;  Schubiner  et  al.,  2002).  In  the  Schubiner  et  al. (2002)  study,  all  participants  had  twice-weekly  group and once-weekly individual cognitive behavioral therapy sessions.  Those  undergoing  behavioral  therapy  plus placebo  showed  significant  improvements  in  ADHD symptoms. Close monitoring is also essential (Castaneda et al., 2000; Wilens et al., 2006); it is imperative to watch for signs of possible abuse, such as missed appointments, and signs of possible diversion, such as repeated requests for  higher  doses  and  a  pattern  of  'lost'  prescriptions. Family members and close friends should be called on to help in monitoring possible abuse.

Nonstimulant choices are also available. Atomoxetine is effective for ADHD, has been studied in adolescents and  adults  (Michelson  et  al.,  2002;  Michelson  et  al., 2003), and has low abuse potential compared to stimulants (Heil et al., 2002; Lile, Stoops, Durell, Glaser, &amp; Rush, 2006). Other nonstimulant options include antidepressants such as desipramine (Wilens et al., 1996), venlafaxine (Adler, Resnick, Kunz, &amp; Devinsky, 1995), and bupropion (Wilens et al., 2005), although none of these agents are currently approved for the treatment of ADHD by the Food and Drug Administration.

## Conclusion

Clinicians  who  treat  patients  with  ADHD  are  faced with the challenge of treating the core symptoms of ADHD while addressing the significant risk of SUD in this patient population. Psychostimulants are highly effective first-line pharmacotherapies  for  ADHD,  but  they  pose  a  risk  of abuse and are Schedule II controlled substances.

When appropriately used (e.g., taken orally at the prescribed dose and frequency) in individuals with ADHD, however, psychostimulants do not appear likely to lead to  abuse. Some evidence even suggests that when psychostimulant  treatment  is  initiated  during  childhood,  it may help reduce the risk of future SUD. Such treatment may  help  patients  better  manage  their  symptoms throughout  critical  early  developmental  periods  and develop adaptive skills that prepare them to successfully face the more rigorous intellectual and social demands of adolescence and adulthood. When choosing and initiating ADHD treatment in adolescent and adult patients, however, it is imperative to consider certain patient variables, including age, the presence of SUD risk factors-such as

comorbid CD and bipolar disorder-and any previous or current  SUD.  For  certain  high-risk  patients,  nonstimulants should be considered.

The  avoidance  of  short-acting  psychostimulant  formulations, particularly  in  adolescent  and  adult  patients with ADHD, is also recommended because euphoria can be achieved even when these are taken orally; stimulants can  also  be  manipulated  to  enable  intranasal  or  intravenous administration. Long-acting psychostimulants do not  consistently  produce  euphoria  when  used  as  prescribed,  and  they  are  not  as  easily  manipulated  for intranasal  or  intravenous  administration  as  are  shortacting agents. As such, long-acting psychostimulant formulations may play an important role in helping manage ADHD in adolescents and adults while helping minimize the risk of SUD. The extent to which the use of longacting stimulants lowers the risk of diversion and misuse remains to be determined.

When choosing therapeutic strategies and coordinating ongoing care, clinicians need to remain mindful of the unique treatment challenges posed by patients with ADHD,  particularly  as  they  mature  into  adulthood. Efforts  to  optimize  patient  outcomes  during  adulthood may need to include pharmacotherapy; close monitoring for,  and  frank  discussion  of,  diversion  and  misuse  or abuse; behavioral therapy or psychotherapy; and educational efforts aimed at helping patients cope with ADHD symptoms in adulthood.

## References

- Adler, L. A., Resnick, S., Kunz, M., &amp; Devinsky, O. (1995). Openlabel trial of venlafaxine in adults with attention deficit disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 31 (4), 785-788.
- Advokat,  C.  (2007).  Update  on  amphetamine  neurotoxicity  and  its relevance  to  the  treatment  of  ADHD. Journal  of  Attention Disorders, 11(1), 8-16.
- Andersen, S. L., Arvanitogiannis, A., Pliakas, A. M., LeBlanc, C., &amp; Carlezon, W. A., Jr. (2002). Altered responsiveness to cocaine in rats  exposed  to  methylphenidate  during  development. Nature Neuroscience , 5 (1), 13-14.
- August, G. J., Winters, K. C., Realmuto, G. M., Fahnhorst, T., Botzet, A.,  &amp;  Lee,  S.  (2006).  Prospective  study  of  adolescent  drug  use among  community  samples  of ADHD  and  non-ADHD  participants. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 45 (7), 824-832.
- Babcock, Q., &amp;  Byrne, T. (2000). Student perceptions of methylphenidate abuse at a public liberal arts college. Journal of American College Health, 49 (3), 143-145.
- Balster, R. L., &amp; Schuster, C. R. (1973). Fixed-interval schedule of cocaine  reinforcement:  effect  of  dose  and  infusion  duration. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 20 (1), 119-129.
- Barkley, R. A. (2004). Driving impairments in teens and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder. Psychiatric  Clinics  of North America, 27 (2), 233-260.
- Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Edelbrock, C. S., &amp; Smallish, L. (1990). The  adolescent  outcome  of  hyperactive  children  diagnosed  by research  criteria:  I.  An  8-year  prospective  follow-up  study. Journal  of  the  American  Academy  of  Child  and  Adolescent Psychiatry, 29 (4), 546-557.
- Barrett, S. P., Darredeau, C., &amp; Pihl, R. O. (2006). Patterns of simultaneous  polysubstance  use  in  drug  using  university  students. Human Psychopharmacology , 21 (4), 255-263.
- Biederman,  J.,  Boellner,  S.  W.,  Childress,  A.,  Lopez,  F.  A.,  &amp; Krishnan, S. (2006, October). Improvements in symptoms of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity  disorder  in  school-aged  children  with lisdexamfetamine  (NRP104)  and  mixed  amphetamine  salts, extended-release  versus  placebo .  Paper  presented  at  the  58th Institute on Psychiatric Services, New York.
- Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Spencer, T. J., Mick, E., Monuteaux, M. C.,  &amp; Aleardi,  M.  (2006).  Functional  impairments  in  adults with self-reports of diagnosed ADHD: A controlled study of 1001 adults  in  the  community. Journal  of  Clinical  Psychiatry, 67 (4), 524-540.
- Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C., Mick, E., Spencer, T., Wilens, T. E., Silva, J. M., et al. (2006). Young adult outcome of attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder:  A  controlled  10-year  follow-up  study. Psychological Medicine, 36 (2), 167-179.
- Biederman, J., Wilens, T., Mick, E., Faraone, S. V., Weber, W., Curtis, S., et al. (1997). Is ADHD a risk factor for psychoactive substance use  disorders?  Findings  from  a  four-year  prospective  follow-up study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(1), 21-29.
- Biederman, J., Wilens, T., Mick, E., Milberger, S., Spencer, T. J., &amp; Faraone,  S.  V .  (1995).  Psychoactive  substance  use  disorders  in adults  with  attention  deficit  hyperactivity  disorder  (ADHD): Effects of ADHD and psychiatric comorbidity. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (11), 1652-1658.
- Biederman, J., Wilens, T.,  Mick,  E.,  Spencer, T.,  &amp;  Faraone,  S. V . (1999). Pharmacotherapy of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder reduces risk for substance use disorder. Pediatrics, 104 (2), e20.
- Brandon,  C.  L.,  Marinelli,  M.,  &amp;  White,  F.  J.  (2003).  Adolescent exposure  to  methylphenidate  alters  the  activity  of  rat  midbrain dopamine neurons. Biological Psychiatry, 54 (12), 1338-1344.
- Carpentier, P. J., de Jong, C. A., Dijkstra, B. A., Verbrugge, C. A., &amp; Krabbe,  P.  F.  (2005).  A  controlled  trial  of  methylphenidate  in adults with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorders. Addiction, 100 (12), 1868-1874.
- Carroll, K. M., &amp; Rounsaville, B. J. (1993). History and significance of  childhood  attention  deficit  disorder  in  treatment-seeking cocaine abusers. Comprehensive Psychiatry , 34 (2), 75-82.
- Castaneda,  R.,  Levy,  R.,  Hardy,  M.,  &amp;  Trujillo,  M.  (2000). Long-acting stimulants for the treatment of attention-deficit disorder  in  cocaine-dependent  adults. Psychiatric  Services , 51 (2), 169-171.
- Coetzee, M., Kaminer, Y., &amp; Morales, A. (2002). Megadose intranasal methylphenidate (ritalin) abuse in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Substance Abuse, 23 (3), 165-169.
- DeVore, E. R., &amp; Ginsburg, K. R. (2005). The protective effects of good  parenting  on  adolescents. Current  Opinion  in  Pediatrics, 17 (4), 460-465.
- Di  Chiara,  G.,  &amp;  Imperato, A.  (1988).  Drugs  abused  by  humans preferentially  increase  synaptic  dopamine  concentrations  in  the mesolimbic  system  of  freely  moving  rats. Proceedings  of  the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 85 (14), 5274-5278.

- Faraone,  S. V.,  &amp;  Biederman,  J.  (2004,  May). Prevalence  of  adult ADHD  in  the  United  States .  Paper  presented  at  the  157th American Psychiatric Association annual meeting, New York.
- Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Wilens, T. E., &amp; Adamson, J. (2007). A naturalistic study of the effects of pharmacotherapy on substance use disorders among ADHD adults. Psychological Medicine , 37 , 1-10.
- Flory,  K.,  Milich,  R.,  Lynam,  D.  R.,  Leukefeld,  C.,  &amp;  Clayton,  R. (2003). Relation between childhood disruptive behavior disorders and substance use and dependence symptoms in young adulthood: Individuals with symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder  and  conduct  disorder  are  uniquely  at  risk. Psychology  of Addictive Behaviors , 17 (2), 151-158.
- Fredericks,  E.  M.,  &amp;  Kollins,  S.  H.  (2004).  Assessing  methylphenidate preference in ADHD patients using a choice procedure. Psychopharmacology, 175 (4), 391-398.
- Gordon, S. M., Tulak, F., &amp; Troncale, J. (2004). Prevalence and characteristics  of  adolescents  patients  with  co-occurring ADHD and substance dependence. Journal of Addictive Diseases , 23 (4), 31-40.
- Greenhill, L. L., Pliszka, S., Dulcan, M. K., Bernet, W., Arnold, V., Beitchman, J., et al. (2002). Practice parameter for the use of stimulant  medications  in  the  treatment  of  children,  adolescents,  and adults. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 41 (Suppl. 2), 26S-49S.
- Heil, S. H., Holmes, H. W., Bickel, W. K., Higgins, S. T., Badger, G. J., Laws, H. F., et al. (2002). Comparison of the subjective, physiological, and psychomotor effects of atomoxetine and methylphenidate in light drug users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67 (2), 149-156.
- Huss, M., &amp; Lehmkuhl, U. (2002). Methylphenidate and substance abuse: A  review  of  pharmacology,  animal,  and  clinical  studies. Journal of Attention Disorders , 6 (Suppl. 1), S65-S71.
- Johnston, L. D., O'Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., &amp; Schulenberg, J. E. (2004). Overall teen drug use continues gradual decline; but use of inhalants rises .  Retrieved  March  12,  2007,  from http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pressreleases/04drugpr.pdf
- Katusic,  S.  K.,  Barbaresi,  W.  J.,  Colligan,  R.  C.,  Weaver,  A.  L., Leibson, C. L., &amp; Jacobsen, S. J. (2005). Psychostimulant treatment  and  risk  for  substance  abuse  among  young  adults  with  a history  of  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder: A  populationbased,  birth  cohort  study. Journal  of  Child  and  Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 15 (5), 764-776.
- Kelley, A. E., Schochet, T., &amp; Landry, C. F. (2004). Risk taking and novelty seeking in adolescence: Introduction to part I. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1021 , 27-32.
- Kessler, R. C., Adler, L., Barkley, R., Biederman, J., Conners, C. K., Demler, O., et al. (2006). The prevalence and correlates of adult ADHD  in  the  United  States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163 (4), 716-723.
- Klein-Schwartz, W., &amp; McGrath, J. (2003). Poison centers' experience  with  methylphenidate  abuse  in  pre-teens  and  adolescents. Journal  of  the  American  Academy  of  Child  and  Adolescent Psychiatry, 42 (3), 288-294.
- Kollins, S. H. (2003). Comparing the abuse potential of methylphenidate  versus  other  stimulants: A  review  of  available evidence and relevance to the ADHD patient. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64 (Suppl. 11), 14-18.
- Kollins, S. H., MacDonald, E. K., &amp; Rush, C. R. (2001). Assessing the abuse potential of methylphenidate in nonhuman and human subjects: A  review. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and  Behavior, 68 (3), 611-627.
- Kollins,  S.  H.,  Rush,  C.  R.,  Pazzaglia,  P.  J.,  &amp;  Ali,  J.  A.  (1998). Comparison of acute behavioral effects of sustained-release and
- immediate-release  methylphenidate. Experimental  and  Clinical Psychopharmacology, 6 (4), 367-374.
- Koob, G. F. (2000). Stimulants: Basic mechanisms and pharmacology. In M. H. Kryger, R. Roth, &amp; W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (pp. 419-428). Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
- Koob, G. F., &amp; Nestler, E. J. (1997). The neurobiology of drug addiction. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences , 9 (3), 482-497.
- Lambert,  N.  M.,  &amp;  Hartsough,  C.  S.  (1998).  Prospective  study  of tobacco smoking and substance dependencies among samples of ADHD  and  non-ADHD  participants. Journal  of  Learning Disabilities, 31 (6), 533-544.
- Levin, F. R., Evans, S. M., McDowell, D. M., &amp; Kleber, H. D. (1998). Methylphenidate treatment for cocaine abusers with adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder:  A  pilot  study. Journal  of Clinical Psychiatry, 59 (6), 300-305.
- Lile, J. A., Stoops, W. W., Durell, T. M., Glaser, P. E., &amp; Rush, C. R. (2006). Discriminative-stimulus, self-reported, performance, and cardiovascular effects of atomoxetine in methylphenidate-trained humans. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology , 14 (2), 136-147.
- MacDonald,  F.  E.,  &amp;  Kollins,  S.  H.  (2005).  A  pilot  study  of methylphenidate  preference  assessment  in  children  diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology , 15 (5), 729-741.
- Mague, S. D., Andersen, S. L., &amp; Carlezon, W. A., Jr. (2005). Early developmental  exposure  to  methylphenidate  reduces  cocaineinduced  potentiation of brain stimulation reward  in rats. Biological Psychiatry, 57 (2), 120-125.
- Mannuzza, S., Klein, R. G., Bonagura, N., Malloy, P., Giampino, T. L., &amp; Addalli, K. A. (1991). Hyperactive boys almost grown up. V. Replication of psychiatric status. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48 (1), 77-83.
- Mannuzza, S., Klein, R. G., &amp; Moulton, J. L., III. (2003). Does stimulant treatment place children at risk for adult substance abuse? A controlled,  prospective  follow-up  study. Journal  of  Child  and Adolescent Psychopharmacology , 13 (3), 273-282.
- McCabe, S. E., Cranford, J. A., Morales, M., &amp; Young, A. (2006). Simultaneous  and  concurrent  polydrug  use  of  alcohol  and  prescription drugs: Prevalence, correlates, and consequences. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 67 (4), 529-537.
- McCabe, S. E., Knight, J.  R., Teter,  C.  J.,  &amp; Wechsler,  H.  (2005). Non-medical  use  of  prescription  stimulants  among  US  college students:  Prevalence  and  correlates  from  a  national  survey. Addiction , 100 (1), 96-106.
- McCabe, S. E., Teter, C. J., &amp; Boyd, C. J. (2006a). Medical use, illicit use,  and  diversion  of  abusable  prescription  drugs. Journal  of American College Health , 54 (5), 269-278.
- McCabe, S. E., Teter, C. J., &amp; Boyd, C. J. (2006b). Medical use, illicit use and diversion of prescription stimulant medication. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 38 (1), 43-56.
- McGough,  J.  J.,  Smalley,  S.  L.,  McCracken,  J.  T.,  Yang,  M., Del'Homme, M., Lynn, D. E., et al. (2005). Psychiatric comorbidity in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Findings from multiplex families. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162 (9), 1621-1627.
- Michelson,  D.,  Allen,  A.  J.,  Busner,  J.,  Casat,  C.,  Dunn,  D., Kratochvil, C., et al. (2002). Once-daily atomoxetine treatment for children and adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:  A  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159 (11), 1896-1901.
- Milberger, S., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Wilens, T., &amp; Chu, M. P. (1997). Associations between ADHD and psychoactive substance

- use  disorders.  Findings  from  a  longitudinal  study  of  high-risk siblings of ADHD children. American Journal on Addiction , 6 (4), 318-329.
- Piazza,  P. V .,  Deminiere,  J.  M.,  le  Moal,  M.,  &amp;  Simon,  H.  (1989). Factors that predict individual vulnerability to amphetamine selfadministration. Science, 245 (4925), 1511-1513.
- Piazza,  P. V .,  Deminiere,  J.  M.,  le  Moal,  M.,  &amp;  Simon,  H.  (1990). Stress-  and  pharmacologically-induced  behavioral  sensitization increases  vulnerability  to  acquisition  of  amphetamine  selfadministration. Brain Research, 514 (1), 22-26.
- Rapoport,  J.  L.,  Buchsbaum,  M.  S.,  Weingartner,  H.,  Zahn,  T.  P., Ludlow, C., &amp; Mikkelsen, E. J. (1980). Dextroamphetamine. Its cognitive and behavioral effects in normal and hyperactive boys and normal men. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37 (8), 933-943.
- Resnick, R. B., Kestenbaum, R. S., &amp; Schwartz, L. K. (1977). Acute systemic  effects  of  cocaine  in  man:  A  controlled  study  by intranasal and intravenous routes. Science, 195 (4279), 696-698.
- Robinson, T. E., &amp; Becker, J. B. (1986). Enduring changes in brain and behavior produced by chronic amphetamine administration: A review  and  evaluation  of  animal  models  of  amphetamine  psychosis. Brain Research, 396 (2), 157-198.
- Rush, C. R., Kollins, S. H., &amp; Pazzaglia, P. J. (1998). Discriminativestimulus and participant-rated effects of methylphenidate, bupropion, and triazolam in d-amphetamine-trained humans. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology , 6 (1), 32-44.
- Schenk, S., &amp; Partridge, B. (1997). Sensitization and tolerance in psychostimulant  self-administration. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior , 57 (3), 543-550.
- Schiffer, W. K., Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., Alexoff, D. L., Logan, J., &amp; Dewey, S. L. (2006). Therapeutic doses of amphetamine or methylphenidate differentially increase synaptic and extracellular dopamine. Synapse, 59 (4), 243-251.
- Schubiner, H., Saules, K. K., Arfken, C. L., Johanson, C. E., Schuster, C. R., Lockhart, N., et al. (2002). Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of methylphenidate in the treatment of adult ADHD patients with  comorbid  cocaine  dependence. Experimental  and  Clinical Psychopharmacology , 10 (3), 286-294.
- Schubiner, H., Tzelepis, A., Milberger, S., Lockhart, N., Kruger, M., Kelley,  B.  J.,  et  al.  (2000).  Prevalence  of  attention-deficit/ hyperactivity  disorder  and  conduct  disorder  among  substance abusers. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 61 (4), 244-251.
- Spear, L. P. (2004). Adolescent brain development and animal models. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021 , 23-26.
- Spencer,  T.  J.,  Biederman,  J.,  Ciccone,  P.  E.,  Madras,  B.  K., Dougherty, D. D., Bonab, A. A., et al. (2006). PET study examining  pharmacokinetics,  detection  and  likeability,  and  dopamine transporter  receptor  occupancy  of  short-  and  long-acting  oral methylphenidate. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163 (3), 387-395.
- Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Office of Applied Studies. (2006). Results from the 2005 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National findings. Rockville, MD: Author.
- Swanson, J., Gupta, S., Lam, A., Shoulson, I., Lerner, M., Modi, N., et  al.  (2003).  Development  of  a  new  once-a-day  formulation  of methylphenidate for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder:  Proof-of-concept  and  proof-of-product  studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60 (2), 204-211.
- Teter, C. J., McCabe, S. E., LaGrange, K., Cranford, J. A., &amp; Boyd, C. J. (2006). Illicit use of specific prescription stimulants among
- college  students:  Prevalence,  motives,  and  routes  of  administration. Pharmacotherapy, 26(10), 1501-1510.
- Volkow, N. D. (2006). Stimulant medications: How to minimize their reinforcing  effects? American  Journal  of  Psychiatry, 163 (3), 359-361.
- Volkow,  N.  D.,  Ding, Y.  S.,  Fowler,  J.  S.,  Wang,  G.  J.,  Logan,  J., Gatley,  J.  S.,  et  al.  (1995).  Is  methylphenidate  like  cocaine? Studies on their pharmacokinetics and distribution in the human brain. Archives of General Psychiatry , 52 (6), 456-463.
- Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., Wang, G. J., Ding, Y. S., &amp; Gatley, S. J. (2002).  Role  of  dopamine  in  the  therapeutic  and  reinforcing effects of methylphenidate in humans: Results from imaging studies. European Neuropsychopharmacology , 12 (6), 557-566.
- Volkow, N. D., &amp; Swanson, J. M. (2003). Variables that affect the clinical  use  and  abuse  of  methylphenidate  in  the  treatment  of ADHD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160 (11), 1909-1918.
- Wilens, T. E. (2004). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the substance use disorders: The nature of the relationship, subtypes at  risk,  and  treatment  issues. Psychiatric  Clinics  of  North America , 27 (2), 283-301.
- Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Mick, E., Faraone, S. V., &amp; Spencer, T. (1997). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is associated with early onset substance use disorders. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease , 185 (8), 475-482.
- Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Millstein, R. B., Wozniak, J., Hahesy, A. L.,  &amp; Spencer, T. J. (1999). Risk for substance use disorders in youths with child- and adolescent-onset bipolar disorder. Journal of  the  American  Academy  of  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychiatry , 38 (6), 680-685.
- Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Prince, J., Spencer, T. J., Faraone, S. V ., Warburton,  R.,  et  al.  (1996).  Six-week,  double-blind,  placebocontrolled study of desipramine for adult attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder. American  Journal  of  Psychiatry , 153 (9), 1147-1153.
- Wilens,  T.  E.,  Faraone,  S.  V .,  Biederman,  J.,  &amp;  Gunawardene,  S. (2003).  Does  stimulant  therapy  of  attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder beget later substance abuse? A meta-analytic review of the literature. Pediatrics, 111 (1), 179-185.
- Wilens,  T.  E.,  Gignac,  M.,  Swezey,  A.,  Monuteaux,  M.  C.,  &amp; Biederman,  J.  (2006).  Characteristics  of  adolescents  and  young adults with ADHD who divert or misuse their prescribed medications. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 45 (4), 408-414.
- Wilens, T. E., Haight, B. R., Horrigan, J. P., Hudziak, J. J., Rosenthal, N. E., Connor, D. F., et al. (2005). Bupropion XL in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder:  A  randomized,  placebocontrolled study. Biological Psychiatry , 57 (7), 793-801.
- Williams, R. J., Goodale, L. A., Shay-Fiddler, M. A., Gloster, S. P., &amp; Chang,  S.  Y.  (2004).  Methylphenidate  and  dextroamphetamine abuse  in  substance-abusing  adolescents. American  Journal  on Addictions, 13 (4), 381-389.
- Woolverton, W. L., Cervo, L., &amp; Johanson, C. E. (1984). Effects of repeated methamphetamine administration on methamphetamine self-administration in rhesus monkeys. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior , 21 (5), 737-741.
- Scott H. Kollins , PhD, is an associate professor of psychiatry at the Duke Medical Center and the director of the ADHD program.