# Just Not to Be You: Debunking the Myths About Addiction

Myths About Addiction

I have absolutely no pleasure in the stimulants in which I sometimes so

madly indulge. It has not been in the pursuit of pleasure that I have

periled life and reputation and reason. It has been in the desperate

attempt to escape from torturing memories.

—Edgar Allan Poe

Bruce, a vascular surgeon in Oregon, was donning his surgical gown when the police barged in. “I was hauled out of the hospital in handcuffs,” he recalled of that sunny day seven years ago. “It was beyond humiliating. I was practicing in a small town, so everybody knew. I was on the front page of the local paper multiple times. It became quite a fall from grace.” This trusted local figure had been writing prescriptions in his patients’ names, only to retrieve them himself to feed his addiction. “I was using enough, writing enough prescriptions,” he recounts, “that the initial suspicion by the police department was that I was running some sort of drug ring.” In a few short months, the jig was up.

What could bring a highly trained, accomplished physician like Bruce, married, father of adolescents, to such depths of self-deception, dishonesty, and professional

malfeasance? Surely he understood he was jeopardizing his health, family, and livelihood. Why, for that matter, would anyone indulge—if that is the right word—in such self- destructive behaviors?

That question has confronted me almost daily throughout my career but most insistently in my twelve years working in Vancouver’s Downtown Eastside, a neighborhood notorious as North America’s most concentrated area of drug use. Within its few square blocks dwell thousands of people living lives of desperate dependence on substances of all kinds, inhaling or ingesting or injecting alcohol, opiates, nicotine, cannabis, cocaine, crystal meth, glue, rubbing alcohol. Even visitors from New York or Detroit or Bristol are routinely shocked by what they see there.

“If the success of a doctor is measured by how long his patients live,” I would often say, “then I’m a failure, because many of my patients die young.” They died from complications of HIV, or from hepatitis C, or infections of their heart valves, brains, spines, bloodstreams. They fell victim to suicide, overdose, or violence, or to vehicles that struck them while they stumbled in a drugged-out haze onto busy streets. Unlike “high-bottom” addicts such as Bruce, now rehabilitated and back on the job, my patients had lost everything—their health, looks, teeth; their families, work, homes. Some had squandered lives of middle-class comfort, and a handful had gone, surprisingly, from riches to rags. All along, they knew full well they were facing the ultimate forfeit: their lives. And still, having struck bottoms lower than most of us could conceive of, they persisted in their habits, as I depicted in my 2009 book on addiction, In the Realm of Hungry Ghosts.

Prevailing views about addiction have progressed somewhat in the past decade, in the direction of more

compassion, science, and sense. For all that, deceptive and dangerous myths about addiction’s provenance and its very nature still reign in many circles, from medical treatment to criminal justice and policy. Even the well-meaning world of rehabilitation and recovery has its blind spots. Given the evident shortcomings and even ruinous harm wrought by our standard approaches, many voices are finally calling for a fresh view.

As a prelude to considering this, let’s deal directly with the two leading misconceptions: that addiction is either the product of “bad choices” or else a “disease.” Both fail to explain this unrelenting societal plague, just as they hobble our efforts toward remedying it.

The bad choices view should by now barely warrant mention, given the scientific advances in understanding, except that it still has a vise grip on many people’s thinking and underlies the legal system’s assault on drug users. It is so wrongheaded as to be laughable—and it would be, if its consequences were not so tragic. It was expressed succinctly in 2017 by then U.S. attorney general Jeff Sessions, hearkening back to the bad old days of the 1980s drug war: “We need to say, as Nancy Reagan said, ‘Just say no,’” he told a Virginia audience. “Educating people and telling them the terrible truth about drugs and addiction will result in better choices by more people.”

The precise success of all the war on drugs campaigns, which have had a half century to make good on their stated goals, can be seen in one sordid fact: even as Sessions spoke, his country was losing as many lives to overdoses every three weeks as had been claimed by the 9/11 terrorist attacks. That year, more than 70,000 Americans would die of a drug overdose.[1] Four years later, in 2021, that figure exceeded 100,000.[2] In the same year, my home

province of British Columbia saw over 1,700 such deaths, nearly double the number killed by COVID-19 in the province as of this writing.

The “bad choices” view of addiction—which, if we’re honest, amounts to little more than “It’s Your Own Damn Fault”—is not only disastrously ineffective; it is utterly blind. I have never met anyone who, in any meaningful sense of the word, ever “chose” to become addicted, least of all my Downtown Eastside patients whose lives slowly ebbed away or were rapidly extinguished in the streets, hotel rooms, and back alleys of Vancouver’s drug ghetto.

If a socially conservative dissenter were to protest, “Didn’t they choose to stay hooked?” I would offer this quote by Dr. Nora Volkow, head of the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse: “[Recent] studies have shown that repeated drug use leads to long-lasting changes in the brain that undermine voluntary control.”[3] Translation: when it comes to addiction, “free will” is in many ways a neurobiological non sequitur.

In fact, I would take it much further: most addicted people had little choice even before their habits took hold. Their brains arrived on the scene already impaired by life experience, especially susceptible to the effects of their drug “of choice” (another dubious expression). Actually, that’s true whether the target is a substance or a behavior. In short, the choice model ignores the question of what would drive a person toward addiction in the first place.

Though the disease paradigm still embraced by most addiction specialists and treatment programs is more compassionate, it, too, misses the human element. It separates mind from body—or, in this case, brain from mind, seeing the brain in purely biochemical terms. The fact is, personal and social life events, filtered through the

mind, shape the brain throughout the lifetime. You cannot, scientifically, cleave biology from biography, especially when it comes to a process as psychologically layered as addiction.

Not that there’s no value in considering addiction’s neurochemical side. The brilliant work of Dr. Volkow and others has demonstrated that substances of dependence do, over time, change the brain so that essential functions, such as impulse regulation—which would aid someone in resisting addiction’s pull—become significantly compromised, even as the circuits of reward and motivation become trained on the desired drugs. In this sense, the brain does become an impaired organ, with diminished capacity to make rational choices, obsessively intent instead on satisfying the addictive drives.

We err, however, when we focus on drugs alone: it does not take a substance addiction to bring about changes in brain chemistry. Scans have shown similar deleterious changes in the brains of nonsubstance addicts as well, such as inveterate internet gamers.[4] The compulsive intake of foods that trigger the brain’s reward apparatus can also produce such effects.[5]

For all that, the equation of addiction with a largely genetically programmed, treatable disease[*][6] is, as mentioned, scientifically and humanely a step forward from the shaming “bad choices” model. Just as we wouldn’t think of blaming the owner of a diseased kidney, it makes no sense to reproach someone for having a “sick” brain, especially if that “sickness” was inherited.[*] The problem is that, in typical medical fashion, the disease paradigm turns a process into pathology. Note, too, that “treatable” is a far cry from “healable”—which says less about the nature of

addiction than about the medical system’s failure to understand it.

The word “disease” also crops up frequently in the world of twelve-step recovery. People in programs like Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous will speak about “my disease,” as in “My disease wants me dead” or “My disease made me hurt the people I love.” No doubt such programs have helped millions, and the language used is a big part of helping people think and act in new ways. I will only suggest that “disease” is more therapeutically useful as a metaphor rather than a literal fact. As with most chronic conditions, viewing addiction as a dynamic process to be engaged with rather than a demonic force to be feared or battled can ultimately expand the possibilities for healing.

For a more grounded take on addiction, we need to consider not just people’s genes or brain circuitry, but also their real encounters with their world. We need to look closely at people’s life experiences.[*] Addictions of any kind are not abnormal ailments, willfully self-inflicted maladies, brain disorders, or genetic short straws. Properly understood, they are not even that puzzling. As with other ostensibly mysterious conditions named in this book, they are rooted in coping mechanisms. To be sure, they may take on some features of disease: a dysfunctional organ, tissue damage particularly with extensive drug use, physical symptoms, impairment of certain brain circuits, cycles of remission and relapse, even death. But to call them “diseases” is to miss both the point and the opportunity to deal with them intelligently. Addictions represent, in their onset, the defenses of an organism against suffering it does not know how to endure. In other words, we are looking at a natural response to unnatural

circumstances, an attempt to soothe the pain of injuries incurred in childhood and stresses sustained in adulthood.

Two Essential Questions

Over my decades of medical practice and thousands of conversations, I have learned that the first question to ask is not what is wrong with an addiction, but what is “right” about it. What benefit is the person deriving from their habit? What does it do for them? What are they getting that they otherwise can’t access? This inquiry is key to understanding any addiction, whether to substances like alcohol, opiates, cocaine, crystal meth, sniffed glue, or junk food, or to behaviors such as gambling, compulsive sexual roving, pornography, or binge eating and purging. Or to power and profit, for that matter—here, of course, we begin to shade toward addictions that go well beyond individual habits into the realm of collective fixations.

Just as I have never met anyone who chose to become addicted, neither have I met anyone whose addictions did not, at their onset at least, provide for some essential human need. Over and over again, for example, I’ve heard that people’s addictions lubricate the gears of social connection. The Canadian Métis[*] writer, professor, and former inmate Jesse Thistle, author of the memoir From the Ashes, told me his substance use gave him “access to friends. And it gave me power, confidence. And it worked for a while—it worked for about the first three years. I became almost, like, bulletproof.” For her part, the multitalented television artist Lena Dunham recalled, “It made me more social. It made me more relaxed. It made it easier for me to communicate.” In her case, “it” was a dependence on, among other things, tranquilizers: highly addictive medications too freely dispensed by physicians.

The boost extended to her creative self-expression: the drugs, she told me, “made me write like a demon because I just completely lost my inhibitions.”

“Warmth” is an oft-heard descriptor for the feeling of being high—it captures a felt sense that addicts know well. The actor and children’s author Jamie Lee Curtis spoke to me of “this warm bath: the way it feels when you’re cold and you step into a warm, not hot, but a warm, really warm bath where that feeling of ease rises as you lower into the warmth. It was a very familiar feeling to me, and it was one that I loved. I chased that feeling for ten years in and out of everything from stealing opiates to manipulating doctors for opiates.”

Curtis’s words reminded me of what I often heard from my hypermarginalized Downtown Eastside (DTES) patients. “What does the heroin do for you?” I once asked a patient just admitted to Onsite, the detox venue above Insite—then North America’s only supervised injection site, where I was staff physician. In his late thirties, with weightlifter arms, a shaved head, and a large brass ring piercing his right earlobe, this fierce-looking man looked right at me and said, “Doc, I don’t know how to tell you this, exactly. It’s like when you’re three years old, sick, shivering with fever, and your mother puts you on her lap, wraps you in a warm blanket, and gives you warm chicken soup—that’s what heroin feels like.” His fellow DTES resident, the poet Bud Osborn, also spoke of the soothing thaw heroin allowed him to experience. “I felt this warmth in the pit of my gut, which had always been really cold.”

The rock guitarist[*] and reality-TV star Dave Navarro told me that he found in his addictions “a kind of love and acceptance,” another running theme among users. His fellow podcaster and author, the British comedian Russell

Brand, also spoke of love. “The first time I took heroin, it felt so sacred and spiritual and warm and maternal,” he said. “I felt like I was held . . . I felt like nothing mattered, and I felt safe.” His use of the word “maternal” is more than metaphorical: it speaks directly to the neurobiology of opiate addiction.

Others find in their compulsive habits a kind of experience that people spend years pursuing in caves, monasteries, and high-priced retreat centers. “Alcohol,” the comedian and former Saturday Night Live mainstay Darrell Hammond said when we spoke, “gives you three or four hours of peace. Just peace. The talk in the head stops, the negative thinking. It’s precious.” Peace and quiet are not qualities most of us associate with the life of an addict, but these “precious” states are often what is sought—and, for a while, found.

Lena Dunham’s tranquilizer dependence provided the temporary illusion of normalcy—an illusion reinforced by the fact that, in our society, her drugs of choice are often acquired via “legitimate” means—a doctor’s prescribing pad. “Pharmaceuticals hold this magical promise of making you function normally, or better than normally,” she says. “Alcohol, you smell it on someone; crack . . . you end up under a bridge. Klonopin,[*] you can go for a pretty long time thinking, ‘Wow, I found the cure to not being able to function in the way that I think people should be able to function in the world.’”

It’s worth asking: Who has ever heard of a “disease” that makes you “feel normal”? Or, when’s the last time getting sick made you “function better than normally”?

In light of these testimonials, how much more absurd Jeff Sessions’s insistence on “better choices” sounds. Shall we do Nancy Reagan one better by erecting more truthful

highway billboards and school cafeteria signs: “Just Say No to Pain Relief”? Or “Just Say No to a Warm, Nurturing Feeling in the Belly”? To inner peace; to calmness, empowerment, a sense of self-worth; to community and friendship; to unfettered self-expression; to an elusive sense of comfortable normality; and to love? “I did notice,” Navarro told me, “that whenever I started using substances again, I got a sense of what a human being is supposed to feel like.” Try saying no to that.

When it comes down to it, all addiction’s incentives can be summed up as an escape from the confines of the self, by which I mean the mundane, lived-in experience of being uncomfortable and isolated in one’s own skin. Underneath however many surface layers of “normal” functioning, that alienated discomfort can be disturbing to the point of torment: a persistent sense of being abnormal, unworthy, and deficient. Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, perhaps the world’s best-known former heroin addict, crystallizes this escape strategy in his autobiography, Life: “It was a search for oblivion, I suppose . . . the convolutions you go through just not to be you for a few hours.”[7]

Why would the self need to be escaped? We long for escape when we are imprisoned, when we are suffering. Addiction calls to us when waking life amounts to being trapped in inner turmoil, doubt, loss of meaning, isolation, unworthiness; feeling cold in our belly, devoid of hope; lacking faith in the possibility of liberation, missing succor; unable to endure external challenges or the inner chaos or emptiness; incapable of regulating our distressing mind conditions, finding our emotions unendurable; and most of all, desperate to soothe the pain all these states represent. Pain, then, is the central theme. No wonder people so often

speak about the benign numbing effect of their addictions: only a person in pain craves anesthesia.

As a quest for self-escape, the internal logic of addiction is inescapable. Where I am is intolerable. Get me out of here.

Here we arrive at the second cornerstone query regarding addiction, one that has become something of a mantra with me: Ask not why the addiction, but why the pain. This is the question neither the prevailing disease- based medical paradigm nor popular prejudice can possibly answer or would even think to raise. Yet without it, we can have no clue as to why this affliction of mind, body, and spirit is so rampant.

To map the hard and inhospitable terrain from which addiction springs, it’s worth asking the people who have traversed it. Listening to their lived experiences leaves one with no confusion about what needs to be soothed, and why. We lack the space to chronicle all the tragic origin stories of the many individuals I interviewed for this book, from the well known to the unknown; what follows is a brief and representative sample.

When the Canadian hockey legend Theoren Fleury was fourteen, his coach began sexually abusing him. “He started a routine whenever I was over—masturbate on my feet, then give a blowjob, then let me sleep.” And that was far from all, he told me. In his chaotic family of origin, with an alcoholic father, he had no one to turn to. On the contrary, he was desperate to make his economically downtrodden and emotionally dysfunctional parents happy. Years later, earning millions of dollars a year as a scrappy offensive star for

the New York Rangers, he was hopelessly addicted to alcohol and cocaine. The opiate-dependent surgical specialist Bruce also lived through a childhood bereft of nurturing. “My father was not present,” he said. “I did not have a father in my life, growing up. He walked out when I was quite young, four years old. And my mother was too young to assume the duties I needed from her. My mother had me when she was sixteen, and she just was a child herself, essentially. I lived my formative years really not having any support. I lived with a lot of pain.” The world-renowned photographer Nan Goldin, who says she did drugs “most of my life,” was eleven when her older sister died by suicide at eighteen. “That was a huge defining trauma for me,” Goldin says. Defining, but not primary. “I grew up in a very neurotic family,” she recalls, understating things by some magnitude. “There was constant turmoil around my older sister . . . Some of my earliest memories were of her throwing things at everyone except me. They put her in mental hospitals, and even sent her to an orphanage. There was a lot of violence, a lot of chaos, a lot of screaming.” When the late Downtown Eastside street poet Bud Osborn was three years old, his father hanged himself in jail, where the Toledo police had taken him after he tried to throw himself out of a window. “As a child Osborn regarded one person as a refuge: his grandmother,” the Vancouver journalist Travis Lupick writes in Fighting for Space, his book on the drug policy reform movement, of which Osborn became a prominent leader. “She was shot and killed by his aunt,

who then turned the gun on herself.” As a five-year-old, Bud witnessed his mother being beaten and raped. A year later he hurled himself off the porch in an attempt to take his own life. Former Saturday Night Live star Darrell Hammond was physically and emotionally brutalized by his mother, as anyone will know who has watched the painful and self-revealing autobiographic documentary Cracked Up. Lena Dunham suffered sexual abuse at a young age, along with a factor that ensures such experiences will leave lasting traumatic effects: emotional isolation. In a recent therapy session under the influence of the medication ketamine, she experienced “witnessing this overwhelming grief about being alone in my childhood.”

While each life history is particular, and while trauma has many faces, some generalization is both possible and necessary, particularly where abuse and neglect meet the lower strata of racial and class status. During my dozen years in Vancouver’s Downtown Eastside, I came to learn that every one of my female patients—many of whom were Indigenous, many caught up in the sex trade—had been sexually abused in childhood or adolescence, one marker of the multigenerational legacy born of Canada’s brutal colonial past. Multiple large-scale studies attest to the dynamic of childhood trauma, including sexual abuse, potentiating later addiction. According to one survey published in 1997, looking at more than one hundred thousand students, adolescents who had experienced either physical or sexual abuse were two to four times as likely to be using drugs as those who reported no such molestation.

[8] The ones who suffered both physical and sexual abuse were at least twice as likely to be using drugs as others who had been subjected to either abuse by itself. Alcohol consumption has shown a similar pattern: in a national sample of ten thousand adolescents, those with histories of sexual abuse were three times more likely to begin drinking in adolescence.[9]

— Now that we have cleared away the thicket of mistaken beliefs about addiction, gotten a sense of what it does for people under its sway, and begun to consider what sorts of life experiences would make those “perks” so palpable and attractive, I propose to pull back the curtain even further in the next chapter. It is yet another myth—at once convenient and highly damaging—that in our world there is a category we can label “addicts,” designating some identifiable group of poor, unfortunate souls, and then, neatly segregated from “those people,” there are the rest of us “normal” folks.

To twist a line from the great George Carlin, it’s a big club—and we’re all in it.
