# The Mind Can Do Some Amazing Things: From Madness to Meaning

Perhaps the line between sanity and madness must be drawn relative to

the place where we stand. Perhaps it is possible to be, at the same time, mad when viewed from one perspective and sane when viewed

from another.

—Richard Bentall, Madness Explained: Psychosis and Human Nature

If we are not to see mental distress solely as illness, then what is it? The view I have come to favor is of a piece with how I approach many other conditions under the “illness” umbrella: rather than seeing it as an intruder from the outside, consider what it might be expressing about the life in which it arises. This framework is, if anything, all the more intuitive when it comes to afflictions that take up unwanted residence in the mind, in a person’s emotional world, in the personality.

Let’s begin with something rather simple, now on the rise: depression, a state I know intimately. The word’s literal meaning is quite telling. To depress something means to push it down, as one might a beach ball in a swimming pool. I like that analogy especially because one can easily feel how much concerted force it takes to keep

the ball submerged, and the way it “wants” to find a way back up to the surface. Keeping it down takes a toll.

What is pushed down when a person is depressed is easily identified by its absence: emotion, the continual flow of feelings that remind us we’re alive. Unlike the wrangler of the beach ball, a depressed person doesn’t choose this submersion of life energy—it imposes itself, turning a once- vibrant emotional landscape into arid desert. The only “feeling” that remains, typically, is more sensation than emotion, a thrumming, indistinct pain that threatens to consume everything, and sometimes does. If we label this depression of feeling a disease, we risk not recognizing its original adaptive function: to distance oneself from emotions that are unbearable at a time in life when to experience them is to court greater calamity. Recall what I called the tragic tension between authenticity and attachment. When experiencing and expressing what we feel threatens our closest relationships, we suppress. More accurately, we don’t: our mind does that automatically and unconsciously on our behalf.

The origin story of my own depression is easy to trace. It is documented in the trove of family photographs, from infancy onward, in which there is hardly ever even a hint of a smile on my face. Gazing at you from these pictures is a child who, at best, is serious beyond his age, when not morose. Under the conditions of war and genocide, I absorbed the feelings of my grief-stricken and terrorized mother; in my earliest photos I see my little self almost mirroring them. “The child can . . . feel the tension, rigidity and pain in the body of the mother or of anyone else he is with,” writes the psychological thinker and spiritual teacher A. H. Almaas. “If the mother is suffering, the baby suffers too. The pain never gets discharged.”[1] I could not

have endured such emotional torment if I had felt it fully— no infant could. Nor was there room for my own sorrow and rage at the separation from my mother at less than one year of age.

As I have noted before, such extreme circumstances as beset my infancy and childhood are not required to induce a splitting from self. The riskiest emotions, and thus the most frequently exiled, are acute grief and healthy anger, two feelings that often get tarred as “negative.”[*] Of course, a child may also have cause to banish her joy, enthusiasm, or pride if these arouse disapproval, envy, or just blank incomprehension on the part of parents too stressed, distracted, or depressed themselves. Either way, repressing the rejected emotion is the surest way of escaping overwhelming levels of vulnerability, of avoiding a too-painful rift between oneself and the ambient world. There is a catch, however: we cannot select which emotions to force below consciousness, nor willfully reverse the mechanism even after it has outlived its usefulness. “Everybody knows there is no finesse or accuracy of suppression,” wrote the American novelist Saul Bellow in The Adventures of Augie March; “if you hold down one thing, you hold down the adjoining.” Thus the repression of emotion, while adaptive in one circumstance, can become a state of chronic disconnect, a withdrawal from life. It becomes programmed into the brain, embedded in the personality.

The neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp, who studied the biology of the brain’s emotional systems as thoroughly as anyone, had scathing words for the physiological disease model. “Popular depictions of depression as a ‘chemical imbalance’ are trivial . . . [All] problems in living, including death, are accompanied by ‘chemical imbalances,’” he

pointed out. He, too, saw depression as an adaptation of the brain to the loss of connection, as a physiological “shutdown mechanism” to terminate distress, “which, if sustained, would be dangerous for infant mammals.”[2] In other words, far from expressing inherited pathology, depression appears as a coping mechanism to alleviate grief and rage and to inhibit behaviors that would invite danger. It is not that neurotransmitters are not involved in depression—only that their abnormalities reflect experiences, rather than being the primary cause of them. Brain disturbances manifest the stresses of existence during formative periods and, once established, become a source of further stress. Hence follow, Dr. Panksepp concluded, “the diverse symptoms and variants of depressive illness.”

It has been transformative for me to realize that my own mental health issues carry genuine meanings that arose from my life within my family of origin in a particular historical context. I have found the same to be true universally, no matter where I look, whose mental “illness” I consider, or indeed how extreme the condition happens to be. If anything, the more flagrant ones are easier to decode. When examined, the manifestations of all the various mental health diagnoses have meaning, from depression through what is called schizophrenia to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, from troubled eating patterns to self-cutting.

— “Before becoming a clinical psychologist, I was considered by some to be a seriously mentally ill patient,” New York therapist Noël Hunter recalls in her book Trauma and Madness in Mental Health Services. Prior to seeking help

in early adulthood, she had been living with intense distress and a sense of “being controlled.” “I was just all over the place,” she told me, “and was very scared of being hospitalized. I saw about six or seven different psychologists, social workers, psychiatrists at that time, and accrued about eight different diagnoses throughout all of that as well.” She was placed on five medications, which she was assured she would have to rely on for the rest of her life. “I feared having my own children one day lest I pass on my genetic faults,” she writes. “The fact that there was unfathomable abuse throughout my entire family, that coldness and greed superseded nurturance and love, and that emotional neglect was balanced only by an intrusive lack of boundaries all seemed irrelevant.”[3] The meaning, once sought, was crystal clear and had nothing of the insane in it: Hunter’s “paranoia” was a faithful, unerring emotional imprint of childhood. Without getting into the details, there had been a time in her life when, young and helpless, she was controlled by powerful, hostile figures in ways she found hurtful and scary, ways that violated her neural expectations and distorted her sense of reality.

The mind is a meaning-making machine. It will generate stories that “make sense” of the emotions that, at a vulnerable time, it could not contain and perhaps still cannot. Yet in the individual’s unspoken history, the emotions were real, and therefore still are. They can surface in a number of different ways, such as Dr. Hunter’s belief in being “controlled” as a young adult. To other minds, such narratives appear as madness itself. “It comes out as somewhat fantastical, so we say, ‘That’s totally non- understandable,’” Hunter remarked. In my experience, the story underneath diagnostic labels like hers is always perfectly coherent if one seeks the truth in the emotional

texture and the biographical record rather than in the content of the paranoid fantasy. Coming to see this coherence and integrate it into her sense of self has enabled Hunter to understand and regulate herself differently. Today she is long off her “lifetime” pharmacological agents. I have witnessed many such examples and know of many more.

Forty-year-old Leslie, a recently certified therapist who is now pursuing an MA in psychology, made over a dozen suicide attempts or serious suicidal gestures from age seventeen to her mid-thirties. Leslie was plagued by chronic insomnia, cried uncontrollably, and could not maintain relationships. Her medical chart was a smorgasbord of DSM nomenclature: chronic depression, borderline personality disorder, dysthymia, panic disorder, ADHD, and, briefly, bipolar disorder. She had also been diagnosed with chronic cystitis and fibromyalgia. At one point she was on five different psychiatric medications, including two antidepressants, an antipsychotic, and a benzodiazepine tranquilizer, and was prescribed a third antidepressant intended to soothe her physical pain, along with an anti-inflammatory.

Leslie’s healing journey—she, too, is no longer on any medications—has centered on finding the meaning in her multifaceted sufferings. Her crushing belief in her unworthiness revealed itself to be a self-protective strategy gone awry. Odd as it may sound, it was the best worst option. A suffering child, as Leslie was—again, the details matter less than the contours—has two possible options when it comes to processing her experience. She can conclude either that the people she relies on for love are incompetent, malicious, or otherwise ill-suited to the task, and she is all alone in this scary world; or that she herself

is to blame for, well, everything. As painful as the latter explanation is, it is far preferable to the other one, which paints a life-threatening picture for a young being with zero power or recourse. The first option is not an option at all. Better to believe “It’s my fault; I’m bad,” which lets you believe there’s the chance that “if I work hard and be good, I will be lovable.” Thus, even the debilitating belief in one’s unworthiness, nearly universal among people with mental health diagnoses and addictions, begins as a coping mechanism, a topic we will revisit in chapter 30.

What of Leslie’s chronic state of panic? Her supposed “brain disorder” was, in fact, the expression of a mind alarmed by early hurt. It is adaptive for the brain of a child in her situation to be in a state of hyperalert fear, even when no immediate danger is present. These adaptations to adversity, once habitual, cannot discern between major and minor threats—or no threat at all. The capacity to recognize safety or threat will evolve in a healthy way under conditions of safety but be disrupted by prolonged early insecurity. Possible outcomes include feeling besieged when there is no threat, or conversely, remaining oblivious to danger when it is present.[4]

Leslie has even learned to have compassion for her self- hurting compulsions. “They were actually trying to protect me from the deep pain that I was in or trying not to feel,” she said. These included hitting herself with a leather belt, as her mother had done when Leslie was a child. When I asked her what that did for her, she answered: “It would kind of calm me down a bit. I would be less dysregulated.” Surprising but true: the very mental patterns and behaviors that seem to throw our lives into such chaos originate as an attempt, a temporarily and partially effective one, to

regulate our nervous systems, to bring our bodies and minds to equilibrium.

The incidence of self-cutting is rising, particularly among young people. If we resist the default to “mental illness” as an explanation for such acts, we might ask instead: Why do people harm themselves? As in Leslie’s case, these behaviors play the role, paradoxically enough, of self- soothing. They bring short-term relief. That more and more people are resorting to self-harm is a marker of the growing prevalence of stress and trauma. The comedian Darrell Hammond told me that cutting himself afforded him “a crisis that’s more manageable than the terror inside you, the one that’s going on in your head . . . You look at a cutter’s arms; those aren’t suicide cuts. Those aren’t death cuts. Those are either ‘I want someone to know I’m in distress,’ or ‘When I start patching this arm up, running and finding the Band-Aid, and cleaning myself up, I have a crisis, but it’s manageable, and the one in my head was not.’” The Canadian Indigenous writer Helen Knott depicts the same process with scorching eloquence: “Those brief moments of the sharp blade dragging across skin provided me with a relief from the hate that I felt for myself. It was as if the moment the skin opened up, it became a vent that poured out all of my fucked-up whirling emotions . . . I didn’t want to die at that time—that’s not what cutting was about. I was doing it so I could put up with living.”[5]

Thus, many actions and beliefs that look like pure insanity from one perspective make sense from another— and always made sense at the start. It is our task, if healing is the goal, to make sense of them newly, now, with the benefit of adult discernment and compassion.

—

We can derive this same lesson from the tragic life of the great comic actor Robin Williams. On August 10, 2014, the night before he died by suicide, Williams attended a soiree in his posh San Francisco Bay Area neighborhood. The others at the party would have seen the effervescent, people-loving persona for which he was so well known. Underneath that mask, he was in despair.

Williams was in the throes of Lewy body disease, a neurodegenerative brain disorder characterized by Parkinsonian symptoms and advancing dementia. Unlike depression or anxiety, this ailment does have distinct physiological markings, even if they can be identified only in an autopsy. “Robin was losing his mind and he was aware of it,” his wife revealed after his death. “He kept saying, ‘I just want to reboot my brain.’” The thought of suicide, however, was not new to him; in a 2010 interview he recriminated himself for “not having the balls to do it.”

In addition to the madcap, on-the-fly brilliance of his work as a comic, he had a sweetness and vulnerability that touched many hearts, a love that poured out into the world but that he could never extend to himself.

The founts of the comedian’s anguish can be located in his childhood. The author Anne Lamott grew up near Williams in Illinois. In a much-circulated Facebook post, she wrote that, as children, “we were in the same boat—scared, shy, with terrible self-esteem and grandiosity.” His lifelong dilemma, she said, would remain “how to stay one step ahead of the abyss.”

In the same post, Lamott alluded to heredity as a likely cause of her friend’s sufferings. Yet I hear in Williams’s own words more than enough information to account for his mental-emotional woes without resorting to genetic superstitions. “My only companions, my only friends as a

child were my imagination,” he once said, an admission of profound loneliness.[6] He initially honed his extraordinary capacity to generate strange and hilarious imaginary characters as a way of breaking his isolation, in a family with an emotionally distant mother and a father he recalled as “frightening.” As many sensitive kids are in the peer culture, he was bullied at school. He found some freedom in fantasy, as his characters “could say and do things I was afraid to do myself.” His comic skills had the original function of gaining him some closeness with his mother. “You get this weird desire to connect with her through comedy and entertainment,” he told the podcaster Marc Maron in 2010. His wording was unkind to himself: there is nothing weird about a child seeking attachment with his parent. What is abnormal is that any child should have to do so. Hence the same coping mechanisms that potentiated his greatest gifts ended up becoming the bars of his prison —the double bind of the hypersensitive child, once again. Underneath his brilliantly turbulent comic persona, he learned to suppress his real feelings. He was past master at that, until his death.

Cocaine, he once implied, gave him respite from his supercharged energy, just as a hyperactive child may be given the stimulant Ritalin to settle him. He had the addict’s lifelong discomfort with the self, the need to flee from his consciousness of himself: “sleepwalking with activity,” he called it. In an episode of the hit 1970s television series Mork & Mindy, he played both the outer space arrival Mork and his real self. “You know, if you learned to say no, you’d probably have a lot more time to yourself,” Mindy tells the comedian. “Maybe that’s the last thing I want,” Robin replies, with an ineffably sad expression on his face.

It wasn’t for lack of self-awareness that the abyss got the better of Williams in the end. Long before he developed a degenerative disorder, he suffered from what he called “please-love-me syndrome,” a self-diagnosis far more penetrating than anything a DSM-toting psychiatrist could come up with. I find myself wishing someone had guided him to connect the dots, to see that “syndrome” as the emotional endoskeleton of his manic-depressive swings, addictions, and suicidality, and very likely his terminal brain condition as well.[*][7] From there, he could have traced the links back even further to the scared, isolated child he once had been. He might have found the meaning that could have saved him.

— What, then, of conditions widely believed to be brain diseases, largely rooted in genetics, such as the group of diverse behaviors and thought patterns called schizophrenia, marked often by psychoses, delusions, and hallucinations? The science is clear and, again, belies popular prejudice. No “schizophrenia gene” has ever been found—or, more accurately, claims of its discovery have had to be serially retracted. Broad surveys have found that at most only about 4 percent of the risk can be attributed to a wide variety of genes—none of them specific to this condition, as they are also seen in cases of ADHD or autism.[8] Again, what is being transmitted, if anything, is sensitivity and not disease. Even the nomenclature should give us pause: the Greek origin of “schizophrenia” means “split mind.” The question follows naturally: Why would a mind need to split itself?

Self-fragmentation is one of the defenses evoked when the experience of how things are cannot be endured. Only

those who know real life to be an insufferable bane are impelled to check out from it. No fixed genetic destiny here, but a survival need composed of constitutional vulnerability and overwhelming life experience. One way for an organism to escape that agony, whatever its source, is to disconnect whenever the distressing emotions are triggered. In the face of trauma, splitting from the present is a form of instantaneous self-defense.[9] From that perspective, it is a miraculous dynamic allowing vulnerable creatures to survive the unendurable.

In psychoses there occurs a prime feature of severe mental illness, disintegration. In such extreme states, with normally related mental processes utterly separated, the person may be completely detached from the here and now. Such is the case in schizophrenia, but absenting oneself from reality can show up in a range of forms from mild to severe, depending on the degree of hurt and the genetic sensitivity of the individual.

A milder flight from reality is dissociation. Helen Knott, subjected to sexual exploitation when very young, describes it well: “My feelings left my body. My spirit sat outside of me like an unacknowledged apparition. I didn’t know whose life I was living, whose body I inhabited. This wasn’t my story, my life, my reality . . . I was scared that if I tried to lean into my feelings, I would fall off the emotional edge and I didn’t know what I would do to myself.”[10] What we call a disorder is revealed to be an ingenious means for an assaulted psyche to absent itself from agony.

Such is also the recollection of the former National Hockey League star Theoren Fleury, who was sexually assaulted by his coach as a teenager and went on to become an advocate for childhood victims of sexual abuse. “The first few times he got at me weren’t so bad because I

was gone. I would open my eyes and he would be standing over me, cleaning himself up. I knew something had happened, but I was not sure what. The mind can do some amazing things. Even years later in therapy, when telling the counselor about it, I would check out—leave my body. She’d have to literally shake me to bring me back.”[11] Horrific though the inciting circumstances were, I hear in Fleury’s use of the word “amazing” an appreciation for the parts of himself that mobilized way back when to protect him from pain—an attitude I heartily recommend to anyone making similar discoveries.

— A chronic, reflexive tuning out is one of the hallmarks of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),[*] now being diagnosed worldwide with increasing and alarming frequency. This is not dissociation-level “out of body”–ness, but it does disconnect one from oneself, from one’s activities, and from other people in ways that disrupt functioning and are, as I personally attest, often highly frustrating. ADHD’s features include poor attention span, distractibility and low boredom threshold, poor impulse control, and (mostly in males) difficulty being still. Millions of children are receiving stimulants as a result, and hundreds of thousands are even being treated with antipsychotic medications—not for psychosis, but simply to calm them, to make them more pliable. This amounts to a vast and uncontrolled social experiment in the chemical control of children’s behavior, since we don’t know the long-term effects of such drugs on the developing brain. What we do know from adult research should give us pause. It has been understood since at least 2010 that prolonged use of antipsychotics is associated with

shrinkage of brain volume in adult subjects.[12] In children we are already witnessing some short-term systemic harm. Here in Vancouver, British Columbia Children’s Hospital has had to establish a special clinic just to deal with the metabolic consequences of such drugs, which include obesity, diabetes, and threats to cardiovascular health.

ADHD is sometimes said to be the “most heritable” mental illness, which in my view is a bit like calling quartz the most chewable crystal. Some experts estimate—I should say misestimate—the heritability of ADHD traits to be in the range of 30 to 50 percent.[13] The genetic thesis never made sense to me, even though two of my children and I myself have been diagnosed with this “brain disease.” Tuning out is dissociation’s less extreme cousin, part of the same family of escapist adaptations. It is invoked by the organism when the circumstances are stressful and there is no other recourse for relief, when one can neither change the situation nor escape it. Such was the imperative in my own infancy. Such, too, was the situation for my three sensitive children—a trait they may well have inherited, as discussed in the last chapter—in an emotionally chaotic home characterized, amid plenty of love, by parental anxiety, depression, and conflict. This adaptation then becomes wired into the brain, without the brain itself being the original source of the problem.

It’s true that we are seeing more troubled children these days, but blaming a child’s behavior on her brain makes no sense—nor does blaming the parents. As we have seen with other conditions, when a syndrome rises sharply in frequency over a short period of time, genetics cannot possibly be the cause. Jaak Panksepp suggested that ADHD is not a brain disease but a problem stemming partly from the thwarted development, in modern societal conditions,

of what he called the innate PLAY system. His proposed solution: more play opportunities for children, to encourage the “construction of the social brain.”[14]

Just as depression is “explained” by the biologically minded as resulting from a lack of the neurotransmitter serotonin, ADHD is chalked up to an insufficiency of dopamine, the brain’s incentive-motivation molecule. So we prescribe dopamine-enhancing stimulants, such as Ritalin or Adderall. While dopamine certainly seems to be implicated, here, too, medical practice ignores the interaction of physiology and environment. Today, voluminous research has linked the symptoms of ADHD to trauma or early stress, and has shown that both can impact the dopamine circuits of the brain and that adversity can interfere with a child’s subsequent capacity to focus and to organize tasks.[15],[16] Such trauma or early stresses can include maternal depression or more overt disturbances in the family milieu. One study reviewed data involving sixty- five thousand children aged six through seventeen years. The parents of those diagnosed with ADHD reported much higher prevalence of adverse events.[17]

The time has come to address the swiftly changing and ever more stressful environments our children are growing up in, before we interfere chemically with children’s brain physiology. When I saw children who met the criteria for this condition, my approach was to consider the family milieu and to help parents understand the stresses they were unwittingly transmitting to their offspring. These children were in every case the proverbial canaries in the coal mine. Sensitive to the nth degree, their “symptoms” expressed the unresolved travails of the entire family system, itself often overwhelmed by the pressures exerted by a culture increasingly unfriendly to development. If we

saw the condition and its associated traits as manifestations of biopsychosocial underdevelopment rather than as symptoms of a disease, we would ask ourselves how to provide the right conditions for healthy brain plasticity and psychological growth. We—physicians, parents, educators—would honor the neurobiology of relationship above all.[*]

We might well learn from our canine friends. A veterinary publication in 2017 reported that some “problem dogs”—more hyper, more distractible, and less obedient than others—can be treated with stimulant medications to abate the “symptoms,” rendering them more trainable. “Of more interest is the fact that certain environmental and social conditions affect the appearance of ADHD symptoms,” reported Psychology Today. “Dogs which have lots of social contacts with other dogs and many interactions with people seem to show fewer symptoms [typical] of ADHD. The more that you physically connect with and play with the dog, the fewer the problems. Dogs that are left alone for extended periods of time are also more likely to show hyperactive symptoms on your return. Another interesting association the researchers found is that dogs who sleep alone (isolated from their owner or other dogs) have more problems.”[18] If only psychologists, physicians, and educators had as much insight and empathic imagination as these veterinarians, perhaps fewer children would be medicated.

— Meaning, when sought, readily shows up as well in bipolar illness, also known as manic-depressive disorder. “I got sick for the first time when I was twenty-one,” Caterina recalled. “It turned into a full-blown psychotic episode. I

thought I was the epitome of evil. I felt I was this horrible thing that doesn’t deserve to exist. I would go into catatonic states and hear voices, all telling me about my unworthiness, my evil nature.”

This interview was unique in that it took place in the presence of Caterina’s parents, instead of the usual one-on- one. They had intuited that their daughter’s problems arose from something beyond her brain chemistry and requested my input.

Caterina’s manic episode ensued after a hostile argument with her mother. “I felt hurt and angry at something she said,” Caterina reported. “I thought I had ruined my family and that we were all going to fall apart. At first it was scary . . . but then it started feeling really good, and it progressed and progressed until I felt like I was very powerful—I could save the world. I wasn’t a force of destruction anymore; I could put all the art back in the world.” (Now twenty-six, she studies art in Toronto.) Typically for the manic state, Caterina felt hyperenergized and did not sleep for a week until she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital. The medications she was prescribed eased her symptoms, but she was not guided to ponder the source of her delusions of malevolent or magnificently benign power. “Do you think that is something we have to look at?” she asked me. “My psychiatrists thought that delusions are just like having a fever.” I replied with a question of my own. “What if your delusions are perfectly accurate? Not accurate in a concrete sense, but accurate to your emotional reality?” I pointed out that both fantasies —“I had ruined my family” and “I could save the world”— have something in common. Caterina was quick to catch the similarity: “In both, I have a sense of control! I’m very powerful.”

The source of that sense of overweening power soon began to surface. “My parents went through a really hard time when I was eleven,” Caterina recalled. “They would have horrible fights at night . . . and they would scream at each other. My dad would cry to me . . . understandably, because he was going through a lot, and we were really close.” That “closeness,” really an unhealthy lack of boundaries that psychologists call “fusion,” had persisted throughout Caterina’s formative years. Harmful as the dynamic was, in Caterina’s mind it was her moral duty to protect her parents: she wore her inability to hold her family together like a badge of shame, proof of her unworthiness. Absorbing a parent’s sorrow is not the Nature-given responsibility of a child. “The reversal of roles between child, or adolescent, and parent, unless very temporary, is almost always not only a sign of pathology in the parent but a cause of it in the child,” wrote the great pioneer of attachment research and personality development, the British psychiatrist John Bowlby.[19]

Caterina’s psychotic phase can be seen as a kind of inner haunting wherein all the intense emotions she’d had to stuff away as a child in order to carry out her “understandable” role came to take over her adult mind. Her parents, who had themselves been traumatized in their families of origin and by political tragedies in their home countries, were unable to handle their own emotions, never mind their young daughter’s. All in all, her self-accusations of ungodly wickedness and her delusions of near-divine potency were two poles of a “power” she never should have been burdened with.

A study in 2013 looked at nearly six hundred French and Norwegian subjects with a bipolar diagnosis. “Our results demonstrate consistent associations between childhood

trauma and more severe clinical characteristics in bipolar disorder,” the researchers reported. “Further, they show the importance of including emotional abuse as well as the more frequently investigated sexual abuse when targeting clinical characteristics of bipolar disorder.”[20] Once again, let’s note that the subtler forms of emotional injury, such as those Caterina sustained as a child, while more difficult to study, are no less harmful to the sensitive youngster.

“So, do you think people should focus on the emotional content of delusions and try to understand them?” Caterina asked me as we wrapped up. “Do you think that’s a way of healing, rather than medicating them?” “It’s not necessarily a question of rather than,” I suggested. “If you weren’t on medication, you’d not be able to have this conversation right now. My problem with the usual approach is not that doctors give medication; only, too often, that’s all they do.”

I advised the family to pursue therapy to sort out their individual traumas and mutual enmeshment.

— Extensive scientific literature now links disordered relationships to food, as well, with early trauma and family stress. Recall that the seminal Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study began after the lead investigator, Dr. Vincent Felitti, began to pay heed to the life histories of patients at the obesity clinic where he served as medical director. “We could help them lose weight,” Dr. Felitti told me, “but not to keep it off. I kept wondering why, until I finally got the message. ‘Don’t you get it?’ they said. ‘We’re stuffing down our pain.’”

As with other people with “genetic” mental health problems, which anorexia is often considered to be, the

personal histories of individuals always reveal meaning. A medical colleague who suffered from anorexia as a teenager, for example, is a self-described perfectionist, a trait that nobody is born with. Rather, it arises as an adaptation to fit in with an environment where one perceives no welcome for being just who one is, with all one’s “imperfections.”

Much as with addictions or self-harming behaviors, or conditions like obsessive-compulsive disorder, there is always a “payoff” with disordered eating patterns. At age seventeen, Andrea, now twenty-seven, became “super, super meticulous” about what she would eat. “I would cook for other people, and I would never eat it. But everything that I would eat for myself was always weighed out, measured out. When I was in university, I remember eating Greek yogurt and granola or muesli for breakfast, and I would measure out absolutely everything in measuring cups. Everything would go into a tracker so I knew what I was eating. It was the ultimate form of control.” At five feet seven, Andrea went down to 106 pounds.[*] She did not menstruate for seven years.

When asked what she “got” from her self-denial, she said: “It’s that sense of control, and also self-acceptance. It made me feel better about myself, because I had control of what I was doing, essentially.” Although she recalled a “not bad” childhood, her mother, Cathy—who participated in our interview—was able to correct the record. She and her husband divorced when Andrea was six, after years of intense marital stress. A child in such circumstances is prone to lack self-acceptance and yearn for agency in an emotionally unstable environment.

This desperate drive to seize some command at least of their own body amid turmoil is almost universal among

people with anorexia or bulimia that I have interviewed. The psychologist Julie T. Anné, who specializes in treating eating disorders, nails it: with her clients, she says, “three lacks” are typical—lack of control, identity, and self-worth— along with a need to numb pain. “In a relational world . . . the human psyche devises a brilliant means to emotionally survive,” she told me. “In our culture, this becomes the pursuit of perfection vis-à-vis the body and self. Also known as anorexia.” And yet these deeply wounded individuals, like the bearers of every mental-emotional burden we have touched on, are all too rarely asked the key questions: Where did this come from? and What valid problem is it trying to fix?

— One of Robin Williams’s most beloved performances, for which he won an Academy Award, is in Good Will Hunting, where he appears in the role of a kindly psychologist tasked with helping an angry Boston janitor after the latter assaults a cop. Played by Matt Damon, this gifted man—he turns out to be an intellectual diamond in the rough—has stuffed his vulnerability underneath a layer of ossified rage and defiance. The most iconic scene from the movie features Williams’s therapist getting right in Damon’s face and repeating a simple but powerful statement, “It’s not your fault,” until the latter finally collapses, sobbing, into his embrace. That message, “It’s not your fault,” conveys not just undaunted compassion, for which Damon’s character was starving inside, but wisdom, too. From behavioral problems to full-blown mental illness, it’s not anyone’s fault—nor, as we’ve seen, the fault of their brains or their genes. It is an expression of untended wounds, and it is meaningful.

The meaning extends beyond people’s individual lives, their families of origin, and their childhoods. If we are going to address the myriad afflictions to which this book has devoted its attention so far, we need to look through a wider lens at the bigger story. If I could distill my message and insert it into that beautiful cinematic moment, I would have Robin Williams look all of us in the eye—including himself—and say with assurance: “It’s not your fault . . . and it’s not personal.” It’s about our hurting world, manifesting the illusions and myths of a culture alienated from our essence.

We turn to that bigger picture next.

Part IV
