# Show of Hands: A New View of Addiction

Addiction

We are long overdue for a new perspective—both because our understanding of the neuroscience underlying addiction has changed

and because so many existing treatments simply don’t work.

—Maia Szalavitz[*]

Having delineated what addiction is and isn’t, and recognizing its impetus and function in people’s lives, I’d like to offer a new working definition, one I believe is truer and more powerful than its antecedents. In eschewing genetic determinism, it entails the possibility of healing. I should issue a caution, though. While more precise and more hopeful, my definition is also more ecumenical—it makes addiction’s “big tent” even bigger. You might just find yourself under it.

Addiction is a complex psychological, emotional, physiological, neurobiological, social, and spiritual process. It manifests through any behavior in which a person finds temporary relief or pleasure and therefore craves, but that in the long term causes them or others negative consequences, and yet the

person refuses or is unable to give it up. Accordingly, the three main hallmarks of addiction are

short-term relief or pleasure and therefore craving; long-term suffering for oneself or others; and an inability to stop.

Two things to note right away: First, my definition omits disease—which is not to say that it must exclude it. As I articulated in chapter 6, most illnesses are best understood as complex processes manifesting a person’s entire life, rather than discrete “things” in themselves. In the end, as with many conditions, calling addiction a disease may capture relevant aspects of it without coming close to explaining the phenomenon, let alone granting us a workable pathway to healing it at its source.

Second, this definition is not restricted to drugs. The same drive that often devotes itself to substances can activate any number of behaviors, from compulsive sexual roving to pornography; from inveterate shopping to the internet (both of which habits I know well); from gaming to gambling; from any sort of binge eating or drinking to purging; from work to extreme sports; from relentless exercising to compulsive relationship-seeking; from psychedelics to meditation. The issue is never the external target but one’s internal relationship to it. Are you craving and partaking of something that affords you temporary relief or pleasure, inviting or incurring negative consequences but not giving it up? Welcome to the meeting. Free coffee in the back.

If you’ve seen me speak on this topic, whether in person or on YouTube, you’ll probably know what I’m about to ask

next. I usually pause here to invite a show of hands: “Who, by the definition just given, is now or ever has been addicted?” No matter the audience size, virtually no one’s hand ever stays lowered—except, I like to jest, for the occasional liar’s. That is how downright normal addictions are in our culture today. I invite you, fearless reader, to put yourself to the same test, with or without the hand-raising.

Of course, not all addictions are created equal, except in the broadest of broad strokes. My HIV- and hepatitis-C- ridden patients in the Downtown Eastside surely stand apart from most of us in the degrees of suffering that hurled them into their habits, in the extent to which their dependencies dominate their lives, and, too, in the dire consequences their habits visit upon them. This is to say nothing about the diminished inner or outer resources available to them, often for socioeconomic and racialized reasons not of their creation. They differ also in the degrees of ostracization and punishment society has inflicted and continues to inflict on them.

These acute differences of degree do matter, and we should not flatten or erase them. But they do not change the fact that the addiction process has certain intrinsic features known to all who live it. It spares no one, not even people at the top. That includes those whose destructive habits, in our culture’s topsy-turvy value system, are spun as “success.” Nor do these differences obviate the fact that most of us “normal” citizens bear far more resemblance than we’d be inclined to admit with those we deride or pity for their more severe or glaring dependencies. It’s not even a fine line that separates “us,” the upstanding, from “them,” the downtrodden: it’s a made-up one.

Here it helps to remember the severity spectrum when it comes to trauma. All kinds of suffering, from the less

obvious developmental wounds we have called small-t to the more overt big-T traumas, can cry out for addictive pain relief. Again, trauma/injury is about what happens inside us, and how those effects persist, not what happens to us. An inquiry into “Why the pain?” has to leave space for the kinds of emotional injuries that may elude conscious recall or, much more often, seem unremarkable to the person doing the remembering.

It is not uncommon for people to tell themselves they enjoyed a “happy childhood.” As long as life is going reasonably well, we may lack any reason to question this narrative. When addiction is present in oneself or a loved one, some inquiry is definitely in order.[*] Looking inward with compassion, most people will be able to locate themselves somewhere on the trauma/psychological-injury spectrum. Genuine happy memories do not rule out emotional suffering, but the usual bias is to recall the former and to suppress awareness of the latter. It has been my experience that even people with the most insistent “happy childhood” narrative will, if asked the right questions, very quickly come to realize that their autobiography has been riddled with blind spots.

In 2015, the writer and theater artist Stephanie Wittels Wachs lost her younger brother, Harris, to an overdose. She herself is a self-acknowledged workaholic, to the detriment of her family life. Until she invited me onto her Last Day podcast, she was convinced—adamant, in fact—that she and Harris had grown up in a normal, happy home. Her remembered evidence for that normalcy and happiness included their mother’s involvement in many school activities—field trip chaperone, president of the PTA, and so on—and a home life where the spousal roles were stable in the traditional sense: working dad, housewife mom. The

sense of security inspired by all these arrangements may well have been real; it certainly sounds like Wittels Wachs grew up with a mother and father who loved their children as best they could and provided for their physical and social needs. Yet embedded in that “normalcy” were experiences of profound emotional hurt she had completely discounted, until they were conjured up from the depths by my questions. “This whole exchange caught me off guard,” she confessed to her listeners afterward. “He is absolutely fucking correct. My talking points on my happy childhood are incomplete.”

David Sheff was likewise “caught off guard” by a similar realization. His book, Beautiful Boy: A Father’s Journey Through His Son’s Addiction, which depicts his son Nick’s nearly fatal stimulant habit, was a bestseller and, more recently, the subject of a poignant film starring Steve Carell and Timothée Chalamet. There had been no big-T trauma in this family, no child abuse or dire adversity. Perplexed, Sheff was forced to ask himself uncomfortable questions to understand what had impelled his talented, vivacious, highly sensitive eldest child into a life-threatening addiction. Looking back, Sheff saw that Nick’s pain must have originated early on, in the crucible of a dysfunctional parental relationship. “We shouldn’t have been together,” he told me. “We had terrible, terrible problems in our marriage.” Self-delusion played a major role: even while engaging in an extramarital affair with a family friend, Sheff harbored “this fantasy in my mind that, you know, if I was happy and she was happy, the kids would be together and then we’d have this happy family and we’d be sort of freeing them from these two traumatic families . . . I actually believed that I was doing this in some ways for Nick. I was justifying it, trying to make it okay.” It is to

Sheff’s credit that he has been willing to look back with open eyes at how it actually was. I don’t know the details, but Sheff did say that he and his son are now having candid and mutually compassionate conversations about those days, with the shared understanding that the pain of Nick’s childhood was a major driver of his later difficulties.

As I have, Dr. Dan Sumrok has met the occasional trauma skeptic. With a long, graying beard hanging mid-chest and a passionate oratory style, this friend and colleague of mine in addiction medicine seems the very vision of a biblical prophet. But if Dan is an evangelist for anything, it’s sanity. Over his career as a family physician, first at the University of Tennessee medical school in Memphis, then in Nashville, and more recently in a rural area, he has treated nearly twenty-five thousand people with opiate addiction. He, too, sees past the medical view of addiction as disease, genetic or otherwise; in his experience, too, trauma is the foundational factor. “I began writing about this in 1980 when I was just discharged from the military. I was a first- year medical student, and my life was flying apart. I would say my best friends were George, Jack, and Jim—the whiskey brothers.”[*] “Some people,” Dan relates, “the real militant Twelve-Steppers, will say to me, and some of the treatment programs have said, ‘You know, it’s not all about trauma, Dr. Sumrok.’ I do want to reassure them, so I say, ‘I promise you, I’m keeping an open mind. I’m waiting to see the first person for whom it’s not all about trauma.’” One would have to wait a long time.

Whatever the degree of injury, all addiction is a kind of refugee story: from intolerable feelings incurred through adversity and never processed, and into a state of temporary freedom, even if illusory. Again, try saying no to that.

— It may surprise many to learn that no drug is in itself addictive, not even the most notorious “high risk” ones like crack or methamphetamine. Most people who try drugs, any drug, even repeatedly, never become addicted. The reasons why throw further light on the nature of addiction.

I often ask audiences, “Is alcohol addictive: yes or no? Is food addictive: yes or no? Or work: yes or no? Or sex: yes or no? Or pornography, or shopping: yes or no?” The right answer, embedded in the question, is “yes or no,” depending on the degree of pain one needs to soothe.

San Diego internal medicine specialist Dr. Vincent Felitti was one of the lead investigators of the now famous (though not famous enough) Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. The study emerged after Felitti decided to listen to the life histories of patients at an obesity clinic who all reported childhood traumas. Carried out in the 1990s in California’s Kaiser Permanente health care network, the research showed that among a cohort of over seventeen thousand mostly Caucasian, middle-class persons, the more adversity a child had been exposed to, the greater the risk of addictions, mental health issues, and other medical problems they faced in adulthood.[1] Adversity was categorized under three general headings: abuse (psychological, physical, sexual); neglect (physical, emotional); household dysfunction (alcoholism or drug use in the home, divorce or loss of a biological parent, depression or mental illness in the home, mother treated violently, imprisoned household member). The impacts of such experiences did not merely add up; they multiplied each other. An adult reporting an ACE score of 6 had a risk

of intravenous drug use forty-six-fold greater than a child with none of the adversities named.

“It is commonly believed,” Felitti said, discussing his research, “that repeated use of many street drugs will in itself produce addiction. Our findings challenge those views . . . Addiction has relatively little to do with the supposed addictive properties of certain substances, other than their all providing a desirable psychoactive relief . . . In other words, this is an understandable attempt at self- treatment with something that almost works, thus creating a drive for further doses.”[2]

Felitti’s childhood adversity findings lay further waste to the myth of genetic determinism that I began debunking in the chapter on epigenetics. No single addiction gene has ever been found—nor ever will be. There may exist some collection of genes that predisposes people to susceptibility, but a predisposition is not the same as a predetermination. What’s true of physical illness is just as true of addiction: genes are turned on and off by the environment, and we now know that early adversity affects genetic activity in ways that create a template for future dysfunction. Human and animal studies have both confirmed that any genetic risks for substance abuse can be offset by being reared in a nurturing environment.[3]

One of the happiest email acknowledgments I ever received was from the grateful mother of a four-year-old. Her husband, a former alcoholic, refused to have children, so afraid had he been of passing the “alcoholism gene” to his offspring. Having read my book on addiction, he recognized the traumatic sources of his alcohol habit and gave up his fear of this nonexistent gene. And just in time— his wife had been nearly past the child-bearing age. I couldn’t suppress a self-satisfied chortle. I’d been thanked

before for “saving” the lives of people I had never met, but never for having been the cause of one at long distance.

The way childhood adversity engenders the neurobiology of addiction has to do with the interpersonal-biological science we have already examined. Experiences of stress in the womb can predispose to addiction, for example, by altering the brain’s ability to respond to stress in functional ways. They can also have long-term influence on the parts of the brain that modulate the incentive-motivation system impaired in all addictions, whether to drugs or behaviors.[*] As the psychiatric practitioner, neuroscientist, author, and leading trauma researcher Dr. Bruce Perry told me, “We’ve done work, and a lot of other people have done work, showing that essentially the number and density of dopamine receptors in these [brain] areas is determined in utero.”[4]

Whoever coined the slang term “dope” for drugs was onto something, because all addictions, whether to drugs or behaviors, involve dopamine. Dopamine is the essential neurotransmitter in the motivation system, without which all mammals are inert, inactive, and lacking all incentive. A hungry laboratory mouse whose brain is artificially denuded of its dopamine apparatus will starve himself while standing in front of a plate of food. In fact, every addict is a dopamine fiend, outsourcing the hunt for the homegrown chemical hit that makes the present moment exciting and vibrant. For virtually every “positive” feeling or quality people derive from their substances or behavior of choice, there are endogenous—naturally occurring— brain chemicals implicated. Addiction begins as an attempt to induce feelings that we were biologically programmed to generate innately, and would have—if unhealthy development hadn’t got in the way.

Sex addiction, for example, has nothing to do with a “high sex drive” and everything to do with dopamine. New York social worker and former Fordham and Rutgers Universities adjunct professor Zachary Alti specializes in sex therapy and behavioral addictions, particularly addiction to porn. “Studies are suggesting,” he told me, “that when viewing a pornographic image, we get a dopamine spike in our brain. When viewing images after images, we get spike after spike after spike. Whereas with substance addictions you typically get one or a few spikes just before use, with behavioral addictions dopamine itself is the substance, the primary component. Especially in pornography addiction, these dopamine spikes happen over and over and over again.” As with smartphone and app companies, pornographers are well aware that their profits rest on the hijacking of their consumers’ brains. The sociologist Gail Dines, author of the bracing 2010 book Pornland: How Porn Has Hijacked Our Sexuality, reports on an article in the trade publication Adult Video News, in which an industry insider trumpets a Stanford University study on cyber-sex addiction showing that 20 percent of porn users are hooked. “In a true capitalist approach,” she notes, the article is cheerfully headed “Exploiting the Data.”[5]

What about the feelings of love that people find in addictions, particularly with opiates—the warmth Jamie Lee Curtis and others spoke of? That is, in large part, a function of the brain’s internal opiate apparatus in which endorphins, our own natural, endogenous opiates, are the neurotransmitters. Dr. Jaak Panksepp suggested twenty years ago that opiate addiction is rooted in the evolutionary brain mechanisms that promote social bonding: nurturing, emotional closeness, and social affiliation. “We would

anticipate,” he wrote, “that individuals who experience especially intense social distress and insecurities would be especially vulnerable to opiate abuse, and this prediction has been affirmed by some clinical research. Indeed, the same dynamic may help explain why opiate addictions are especially prevalent among the socially disenfranchised.”[6] The current opioid overdose crisis in the United States, and to lesser degrees in Canada and the U.K., has tragically borne out the acuity of this observation.

The endorphin system, too, is dependent on supportive, attuned relationships early in life for its development. “Face-to-face interactions activate the child’s sympathetic nervous system,” writes Louis Cozolino, a clinical psychologist, neuroscientist, and professor of psychology at Pepperdine University. “These higher levels of activation correlate with increased production of oxytocin, prolactin, endorphins, and dopamine; some of the same biochemical systems involved in addiction.”[7] A child’s closeness with the attuned, emotionally available parent promotes the optimal growth of brain systems; the lack of it inhibits healthy development.

Work has been the main, but not only, addiction of singer-songwriter Alanis Morissette. In endorphin-friendly terms, she now speaks of it as a compensation. “There’s an attachment-craving in being famous,” she said when we spoke. “If you think about it, eyeballs are on you. Everyone’s hyper-responsive. Everyone’s paying attention to you . . . You keep chasing that sense of being loved and adored and stared at.” Morissette was seeking to attain through her fame that state of infant bliss so many miss out on or experience all too briefly.

When Robert Palmer sang about being addicted to love, he might have been speaking to all of us with our hands

raised—all the drug addicts, all the workaholics, all the compulsive gamblers and shoppers and eaters, all those hopelessly chasing the next exciting high or soothing low. Except it’s not really love we get hooked on but our desperate attempts to cope with its lack, by any means necessary.

Sobering stuff, I know. But we might as well face it.
### Chapter 16: Show of Hands: A New View of Addiction

Addiction

We are long overdue for a new perspective—both because our understanding of the neuroscience underlying addiction has changed

and because so many existing treatments simply don’t work.

—Maia Szalavitz[*]

Having delineated what addiction is and isn’t, and recognizing its impetus and function in people’s lives, I’d like to offer a new working definition, one I believe is truer and more powerful than its antecedents. In eschewing genetic determinism, it entails the possibility of healing. I should issue a caution, though. While more precise and more hopeful, my definition is also more ecumenical—it makes addiction’s “big tent” even bigger. You might just find yourself under it.

Addiction is a complex psychological, emotional, physiological, neurobiological, social, and spiritual process. It manifests through any behavior in which a person finds temporary relief or pleasure and therefore craves, but that in the long term causes them or others negative consequences, and yet the

person refuses or is unable to give it up. Accordingly, the three main hallmarks of addiction are

short-term relief or pleasure and therefore craving; long-term suffering for oneself or others; and an inability to stop.

Two things to note right away: First, my definition omits disease—which is not to say that it must exclude it. As I articulated in chapter 6, most illnesses are best understood as complex processes manifesting a person’s entire life, rather than discrete “things” in themselves. In the end, as with many conditions, calling addiction a disease may capture relevant aspects of it without coming close to explaining the phenomenon, let alone granting us a workable pathway to healing it at its source.

Second, this definition is not restricted to drugs. The same drive that often devotes itself to substances can activate any number of behaviors, from compulsive sexual roving to pornography; from inveterate shopping to the internet (both of which habits I know well); from gaming to gambling; from any sort of binge eating or drinking to purging; from work to extreme sports; from relentless exercising to compulsive relationship-seeking; from psychedelics to meditation. The issue is never the external target but one’s internal relationship to it. Are you craving and partaking of something that affords you temporary relief or pleasure, inviting or incurring negative consequences but not giving it up? Welcome to the meeting. Free coffee in the back.

If you’ve seen me speak on this topic, whether in person or on YouTube, you’ll probably know what I’m about to ask

next. I usually pause here to invite a show of hands: “Who, by the definition just given, is now or ever has been addicted?” No matter the audience size, virtually no one’s hand ever stays lowered—except, I like to jest, for the occasional liar’s. That is how downright normal addictions are in our culture today. I invite you, fearless reader, to put yourself to the same test, with or without the hand-raising.

Of course, not all addictions are created equal, except in the broadest of broad strokes. My HIV- and hepatitis-C- ridden patients in the Downtown Eastside surely stand apart from most of us in the degrees of suffering that hurled them into their habits, in the extent to which their dependencies dominate their lives, and, too, in the dire consequences their habits visit upon them. This is to say nothing about the diminished inner or outer resources available to them, often for socioeconomic and racialized reasons not of their creation. They differ also in the degrees of ostracization and punishment society has inflicted and continues to inflict on them.

These acute differences of degree do matter, and we should not flatten or erase them. But they do not change the fact that the addiction process has certain intrinsic features known to all who live it. It spares no one, not even people at the top. That includes those whose destructive habits, in our culture’s topsy-turvy value system, are spun as “success.” Nor do these differences obviate the fact that most of us “normal” citizens bear far more resemblance than we’d be inclined to admit with those we deride or pity for their more severe or glaring dependencies. It’s not even a fine line that separates “us,” the upstanding, from “them,” the downtrodden: it’s a made-up one.

Here it helps to remember the severity spectrum when it comes to trauma. All kinds of suffering, from the less

obvious developmental wounds we have called small-t to the more overt big-T traumas, can cry out for addictive pain relief. Again, trauma/injury is about what happens inside us, and how those effects persist, not what happens to us. An inquiry into “Why the pain?” has to leave space for the kinds of emotional injuries that may elude conscious recall or, much more often, seem unremarkable to the person doing the remembering.

It is not uncommon for people to tell themselves they enjoyed a “happy childhood.” As long as life is going reasonably well, we may lack any reason to question this narrative. When addiction is present in oneself or a loved one, some inquiry is definitely in order.[*] Looking inward with compassion, most people will be able to locate themselves somewhere on the trauma/psychological-injury spectrum. Genuine happy memories do not rule out emotional suffering, but the usual bias is to recall the former and to suppress awareness of the latter. It has been my experience that even people with the most insistent “happy childhood” narrative will, if asked the right questions, very quickly come to realize that their autobiography has been riddled with blind spots.

In 2015, the writer and theater artist Stephanie Wittels Wachs lost her younger brother, Harris, to an overdose. She herself is a self-acknowledged workaholic, to the detriment of her family life. Until she invited me onto her Last Day podcast, she was convinced—adamant, in fact—that she and Harris had grown up in a normal, happy home. Her remembered evidence for that normalcy and happiness included their mother’s involvement in many school activities—field trip chaperone, president of the PTA, and so on—and a home life where the spousal roles were stable in the traditional sense: working dad, housewife mom. The

sense of security inspired by all these arrangements may well have been real; it certainly sounds like Wittels Wachs grew up with a mother and father who loved their children as best they could and provided for their physical and social needs. Yet embedded in that “normalcy” were experiences of profound emotional hurt she had completely discounted, until they were conjured up from the depths by my questions. “This whole exchange caught me off guard,” she confessed to her listeners afterward. “He is absolutely fucking correct. My talking points on my happy childhood are incomplete.”

David Sheff was likewise “caught off guard” by a similar realization. His book, Beautiful Boy: A Father’s Journey Through His Son’s Addiction, which depicts his son Nick’s nearly fatal stimulant habit, was a bestseller and, more recently, the subject of a poignant film starring Steve Carell and Timothée Chalamet. There had been no big-T trauma in this family, no child abuse or dire adversity. Perplexed, Sheff was forced to ask himself uncomfortable questions to understand what had impelled his talented, vivacious, highly sensitive eldest child into a life-threatening addiction. Looking back, Sheff saw that Nick’s pain must have originated early on, in the crucible of a dysfunctional parental relationship. “We shouldn’t have been together,” he told me. “We had terrible, terrible problems in our marriage.” Self-delusion played a major role: even while engaging in an extramarital affair with a family friend, Sheff harbored “this fantasy in my mind that, you know, if I was happy and she was happy, the kids would be together and then we’d have this happy family and we’d be sort of freeing them from these two traumatic families . . . I actually believed that I was doing this in some ways for Nick. I was justifying it, trying to make it okay.” It is to

Sheff’s credit that he has been willing to look back with open eyes at how it actually was. I don’t know the details, but Sheff did say that he and his son are now having candid and mutually compassionate conversations about those days, with the shared understanding that the pain of Nick’s childhood was a major driver of his later difficulties.

As I have, Dr. Dan Sumrok has met the occasional trauma skeptic. With a long, graying beard hanging mid-chest and a passionate oratory style, this friend and colleague of mine in addiction medicine seems the very vision of a biblical prophet. But if Dan is an evangelist for anything, it’s sanity. Over his career as a family physician, first at the University of Tennessee medical school in Memphis, then in Nashville, and more recently in a rural area, he has treated nearly twenty-five thousand people with opiate addiction. He, too, sees past the medical view of addiction as disease, genetic or otherwise; in his experience, too, trauma is the foundational factor. “I began writing about this in 1980 when I was just discharged from the military. I was a first- year medical student, and my life was flying apart. I would say my best friends were George, Jack, and Jim—the whiskey brothers.”[*] “Some people,” Dan relates, “the real militant Twelve-Steppers, will say to me, and some of the treatment programs have said, ‘You know, it’s not all about trauma, Dr. Sumrok.’ I do want to reassure them, so I say, ‘I promise you, I’m keeping an open mind. I’m waiting to see the first person for whom it’s not all about trauma.’” One would have to wait a long time.

Whatever the degree of injury, all addiction is a kind of refugee story: from intolerable feelings incurred through adversity and never processed, and into a state of temporary freedom, even if illusory. Again, try saying no to that.

— It may surprise many to learn that no drug is in itself addictive, not even the most notorious “high risk” ones like crack or methamphetamine. Most people who try drugs, any drug, even repeatedly, never become addicted. The reasons why throw further light on the nature of addiction.

I often ask audiences, “Is alcohol addictive: yes or no? Is food addictive: yes or no? Or work: yes or no? Or sex: yes or no? Or pornography, or shopping: yes or no?” The right answer, embedded in the question, is “yes or no,” depending on the degree of pain one needs to soothe.

San Diego internal medicine specialist Dr. Vincent Felitti was one of the lead investigators of the now famous (though not famous enough) Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. The study emerged after Felitti decided to listen to the life histories of patients at an obesity clinic who all reported childhood traumas. Carried out in the 1990s in California’s Kaiser Permanente health care network, the research showed that among a cohort of over seventeen thousand mostly Caucasian, middle-class persons, the more adversity a child had been exposed to, the greater the risk of addictions, mental health issues, and other medical problems they faced in adulthood.[1] Adversity was categorized under three general headings: abuse (psychological, physical, sexual); neglect (physical, emotional); household dysfunction (alcoholism or drug use in the home, divorce or loss of a biological parent, depression or mental illness in the home, mother treated violently, imprisoned household member). The impacts of such experiences did not merely add up; they multiplied each other. An adult reporting an ACE score of 6 had a risk

of intravenous drug use forty-six-fold greater than a child with none of the adversities named.

“It is commonly believed,” Felitti said, discussing his research, “that repeated use of many street drugs will in itself produce addiction. Our findings challenge those views . . . Addiction has relatively little to do with the supposed addictive properties of certain substances, other than their all providing a desirable psychoactive relief . . . In other words, this is an understandable attempt at self- treatment with something that almost works, thus creating a drive for further doses.”[2]

Felitti’s childhood adversity findings lay further waste to the myth of genetic determinism that I began debunking in the chapter on epigenetics. No single addiction gene has ever been found—nor ever will be. There may exist some collection of genes that predisposes people to susceptibility, but a predisposition is not the same as a predetermination. What’s true of physical illness is just as true of addiction: genes are turned on and off by the environment, and we now know that early adversity affects genetic activity in ways that create a template for future dysfunction. Human and animal studies have both confirmed that any genetic risks for substance abuse can be offset by being reared in a nurturing environment.[3]

One of the happiest email acknowledgments I ever received was from the grateful mother of a four-year-old. Her husband, a former alcoholic, refused to have children, so afraid had he been of passing the “alcoholism gene” to his offspring. Having read my book on addiction, he recognized the traumatic sources of his alcohol habit and gave up his fear of this nonexistent gene. And just in time— his wife had been nearly past the child-bearing age. I couldn’t suppress a self-satisfied chortle. I’d been thanked

before for “saving” the lives of people I had never met, but never for having been the cause of one at long distance.

The way childhood adversity engenders the neurobiology of addiction has to do with the interpersonal-biological science we have already examined. Experiences of stress in the womb can predispose to addiction, for example, by altering the brain’s ability to respond to stress in functional ways. They can also have long-term influence on the parts of the brain that modulate the incentive-motivation system impaired in all addictions, whether to drugs or behaviors.[*] As the psychiatric practitioner, neuroscientist, author, and leading trauma researcher Dr. Bruce Perry told me, “We’ve done work, and a lot of other people have done work, showing that essentially the number and density of dopamine receptors in these [brain] areas is determined in utero.”[4]

Whoever coined the slang term “dope” for drugs was onto something, because all addictions, whether to drugs or behaviors, involve dopamine. Dopamine is the essential neurotransmitter in the motivation system, without which all mammals are inert, inactive, and lacking all incentive. A hungry laboratory mouse whose brain is artificially denuded of its dopamine apparatus will starve himself while standing in front of a plate of food. In fact, every addict is a dopamine fiend, outsourcing the hunt for the homegrown chemical hit that makes the present moment exciting and vibrant. For virtually every “positive” feeling or quality people derive from their substances or behavior of choice, there are endogenous—naturally occurring— brain chemicals implicated. Addiction begins as an attempt to induce feelings that we were biologically programmed to generate innately, and would have—if unhealthy development hadn’t got in the way.

Sex addiction, for example, has nothing to do with a “high sex drive” and everything to do with dopamine. New York social worker and former Fordham and Rutgers Universities adjunct professor Zachary Alti specializes in sex therapy and behavioral addictions, particularly addiction to porn. “Studies are suggesting,” he told me, “that when viewing a pornographic image, we get a dopamine spike in our brain. When viewing images after images, we get spike after spike after spike. Whereas with substance addictions you typically get one or a few spikes just before use, with behavioral addictions dopamine itself is the substance, the primary component. Especially in pornography addiction, these dopamine spikes happen over and over and over again.” As with smartphone and app companies, pornographers are well aware that their profits rest on the hijacking of their consumers’ brains. The sociologist Gail Dines, author of the bracing 2010 book Pornland: How Porn Has Hijacked Our Sexuality, reports on an article in the trade publication Adult Video News, in which an industry insider trumpets a Stanford University study on cyber-sex addiction showing that 20 percent of porn users are hooked. “In a true capitalist approach,” she notes, the article is cheerfully headed “Exploiting the Data.”[5]

What about the feelings of love that people find in addictions, particularly with opiates—the warmth Jamie Lee Curtis and others spoke of? That is, in large part, a function of the brain’s internal opiate apparatus in which endorphins, our own natural, endogenous opiates, are the neurotransmitters. Dr. Jaak Panksepp suggested twenty years ago that opiate addiction is rooted in the evolutionary brain mechanisms that promote social bonding: nurturing, emotional closeness, and social affiliation. “We would

anticipate,” he wrote, “that individuals who experience especially intense social distress and insecurities would be especially vulnerable to opiate abuse, and this prediction has been affirmed by some clinical research. Indeed, the same dynamic may help explain why opiate addictions are especially prevalent among the socially disenfranchised.”[6] The current opioid overdose crisis in the United States, and to lesser degrees in Canada and the U.K., has tragically borne out the acuity of this observation.

The endorphin system, too, is dependent on supportive, attuned relationships early in life for its development. “Face-to-face interactions activate the child’s sympathetic nervous system,” writes Louis Cozolino, a clinical psychologist, neuroscientist, and professor of psychology at Pepperdine University. “These higher levels of activation correlate with increased production of oxytocin, prolactin, endorphins, and dopamine; some of the same biochemical systems involved in addiction.”[7] A child’s closeness with the attuned, emotionally available parent promotes the optimal growth of brain systems; the lack of it inhibits healthy development.

Work has been the main, but not only, addiction of singer-songwriter Alanis Morissette. In endorphin-friendly terms, she now speaks of it as a compensation. “There’s an attachment-craving in being famous,” she said when we spoke. “If you think about it, eyeballs are on you. Everyone’s hyper-responsive. Everyone’s paying attention to you . . . You keep chasing that sense of being loved and adored and stared at.” Morissette was seeking to attain through her fame that state of infant bliss so many miss out on or experience all too briefly.

When Robert Palmer sang about being addicted to love, he might have been speaking to all of us with our hands

raised—all the drug addicts, all the workaholics, all the compulsive gamblers and shoppers and eaters, all those hopelessly chasing the next exciting high or soothing low. Except it’s not really love we get hooked on but our desperate attempts to cope with its lack, by any means necessary.

Sobering stuff, I know. But we might as well face it.
