## Book Forum: New Name, New Direction

Les enfants seuls savent ce qu \_ ils cherchent I [Only children know what they are seeking I ] V Antoine de Saint-Exupe ´ry, Le Petit Prince

It is with great pleasure that I step into the role of assistant editor for book reviews in the Journal. I am thrilled to be offered the opportunity to peruse the rich body of published works in child and adolescent psychiatry with the goal of matching selected books with dedicated reviewers. I am also anxious to live up to the standards set by my predecessor.

In his inaugural column in January 2004, 1 Andre ´s Martin encouraged readers to appreciate the book review as the view from an altitude of 30,000 feet: like the pilot in a cockpit whose glance can span whole continents. The reviewer \_ s craft lies in providing a perspective, by distilling information and integrating a singular text into a larger framework. Pulling that old favorite, Dr. Seuss \_ The Cat in the Hat, from his bookshelf, Andre ´s suggested how a review should (and should not) be done. In the back pages of the Journal , it was never B too cold to go out/too wet to play ball. [ Nomore repetition of content or advertisements of worth; instead, he exhorted reviewers practice their art, to use humor and creativity, to let their prose transport readers across the terrain of our field and even over the borders into other disciplines.

It worked. The book review section of the Journal has blossomed. Seasoned clinicians, teachers, and researchers in a range of medical disciplines, as well as junior faculty and trainees, have brought their collective wisdom, personal and clinical experience, and facility with language to each and every review. This month \_ s Book Forum is a good example of the section \_ s breadth and depth; it features two very different commentaries on a journalist \_ s expose ´ of questionable pharmaceutical industry practices, an assessment of new recommendations for using dialectical behavior therapy with adolescents, and a review of a how-to manual for those clinicians who wish to become more adept at cognitivebehavioral therapy.

Where should we go from here? Child and adolescent psychiatry, as a field, can claim a large and diverse bibliography: the Journal has a challenging mandate. Certainly we must preserve and advance its standing as a major professional, research-focused publication. At the same time, we should continue to support the equally important variety of subspecialties within the field and attend to groundbreaking changes in government, industry, and education.

For starters, we are changing the name; henceforth, this column will be called Book Forum. A forum is an open public space where people can meet and exchange ideas. We have before us a different bibliographic landscape than in the past, one flooded with popular written materials about mental illness. In addition to reviewing major textbooks, books about developments in neuroscience, and those about specific psychiatric disorders and their treatment, we must make an effort to keep pace with what our patients, our friends, and our colleagues are reading. We will expand our range to include works of fiction, patient and physician memoirs, and self-help books. Shriver \_ s We Should Talk About Kevin (2006) painfully informs our understanding of murderous children, Smith \_ s The Beautiful Miscellaneous (2007) shows us a son who cannot live up to his father \_ s expectations, Runyon \_ s The Burn Journals (2004) explores the thought process of a teenager who attempts suicide. Reviewers are encouraged and invited to help us understand the lessons these books have to teach. And we must consider the vast, unexplored territory of children \_ s literature. Let us continue to learn from the classics and remind ourselves, after Saint-Exupe ´ry, that such books and our reviews can bring us, as adults, closer to what has likely become a distant and mysterious experience of childhood. Book reviews are not just panoramas seen from above; they can also be windows into the private and exclusive culture of childhood.

We should be particularly interested in those contemporary books written about mental illness expressly for children. Lowry \_ s The Silent Boy (2003) and Gantos \_ Joey Pigza series (2000), respectively, capture from a child \_ s perspective the tragedy and trauma of autism and attention deficit disorder. Our patients are reading these books and books like them, identifying with their characters, and learning more about themselves. Their parents are reading them, too.

So, I will take heed and buy some sturdy bookshelves, welcome my new library, and aim to bring you honest, sometimes provocative reviews that offer informed opinions of contemporary published work related to child and adolescent psychiatry. You, the readers V clinicians, researchers, teachers, and students V are also the reviewers. Join me in this endeavor, and together we will try to encourage and assist a new generation of readers to attain a better understanding and mastery of their field and of themselves.

Laura M. Prager, M.D. Massachusetts General Hospital Boston lmprager@partners.org DOI: 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815af9e1

Disclosure: The author reports no conflict of interest.

## REFERENCE

1. Martin A. On the book review as form and a forum. J Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2004;43:110 Y 111.