<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## The Journal for Nurse Practitioners

j o urnal homepage: www.npjournal.org

## Preventing the Next Epidemic: Prescribed Stimulant Abuse

Kamala D. Via, MSN, PMHNP

Keywords: attention-de /uniFB01 cit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) college students nonmedical use of prescriptions substance use young adults

## Introduction

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services initiative Healthy People 2020 identi /uniFB01 ed a need to reduce the nonmedical use of stimulants among young adults. However, the percentage of consistent misuse/abuse continues to increase and impact lives. 1 Consequences of nonprescription drug use may include dangerous driving, elevated risk of unsafe sexual practices and graduating to illicit substances. 2 The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration ' s (SAMSHA) 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health identi /uniFB01 ed almost 2 million people over age 12 years misusing stimulants. 3 Stimulant misuse is described as the nonmedical use of prescribed stimulants by individuals with or without a prescription. Dilemmas surrounding diversion and misuse have been elevated related to the increased availability of prescribed stimulants. 4 The highest rates of diversion for students span 16% to 29% for nonmedical use to sell, give, or exchange prescribed stimulants. 5

Stimulant abuse concerns have been well documented and are not currently receiving the attention that opioids are commanding; however, nonprescription stimulant abuse/misuse has the potential to rise based on the Monitoring the Future (2015) report of high school 12th graders. Greater than 7% of 44,000 high schoolers participating in the 2015 survey reported abusing Adderall. 6

The Centers for Disease Control estimates that 11% of adolescents and young adults are diagnosed with attention-de /uniFB01 cit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 7 As these young adults age and matriculate through college, exposure to and participation in nonprescription stimulant use increases. SAMSHA ' s 2014 National Survey on Drug Use identi /uniFB01 ed the average age for an individual ' s /uniFB01 rst nonprescription stimulant use as 22 years old. 8 The American College Health Association (ACHA) estimates that 7.8% of college students are diagnosed with ADHD. The survey of 33,512 students across the country cited approximately 6.7% of students engaged in

## a b s t r a c t

Prescribed stimulant abuse continues to rise, along with prescriptions for attention-de /uniFB01 cit/hyperactivity disorders. When used with targeted symptoms, the medications are effective. However, this escalating crisis is being overshadowed by the current opioid epidemic. Abuse of prescribed stimulants can lead to increases in risky behaviors, legal issues, or death. The exposure and availability of prescription stimulants can be dangerous to young adults not equipped to handle the responsibility of appropriate use. The purpose of this article is to present health care providers with practical clinical considerations to reduce stimulant abuse and prevent the need to treat a substance use disorder.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

using stimulants that were not prescribed to them. 9 The ACHA ' s Fall 2016 Executive Summary detailed risky behaviors to which students are prone with inappropriate stimulant use.

The number of individuals diagnosed with ADHD or adult attention-de /uniFB01 cit disorder (ADD) has increased, making the ability to inappropriately access stimulants readily available. 2 Research highlights the steady rise of stimulant use among college students for more than 20 years. The National Health Interview Survey revealed a surged from 6.1% to 10.2% for children and adolescents between 1997 and 2016, whereas the National Survey of Children ' s Health demonstrated 42% increase between 2003 and 2011 of ADHD diagnoses. 10

Contrasting studies suggest individuals prescribed stimulants may either be at an elevated risk of misuse, or there are no valid concerns for abuse issues. Additionally, researchers noted that protective factors of treating ADHD reduced the potential for abuse. 11 Investigators have concluded the need for providers to be aware of comorbid substance use disorders when treating both ADHD and ADD. 12

The National Institute for Drug Abuse has identi /uniFB01 ed clinicians as having considerable in /uniFB02 uence in identifying a patient ' s transition from misuse to addiction concerns. Utilizing brief interventions, clinical assessments to discuss medication adherence or current atrisk behaviors may positively affect patient protective factors. Newly developed prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMP) are useful tools to assist health care providers in reducing the progression of nonprescription stimulant use and prevent substance use disorders. States and territories across the United States have implemented PDMPs to decrease diversion and prescription drug abuse. With 80% of Americans seeing a clinician in the preceding 12 months, health care providers are in a unique position to have an impact on potential abuse concerns. 13

This article reviews the clinician ' s role in accurately assessing and diagnosing ADHD; discusses available screening tools; and

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

addresses the provider ' s role for prescribing stimulants safely, recognizing risk factors for stimulant abuse, and implementing harm reduction steps for treatment. The purpose of this article is to provide healthcare providers with practical clinical considerations when prescribing stimulants.

## Background

Diagnosis and medication management of ADHD have increased exponentially over the past 20 years in the United States and outpaced countries around the world. 14 With greater than 10% of the population of adolescents and young adults being diagnosed with ADHD, positive implications of increased prevalence may indicate rising public knowledge, expanded health care access, and greater comfort of primary care providers with diagnosis and treatment. In primary care settings, providers frequently diagnosis children presenting with hyperactivity, impulsivity, or inattention with ADHD using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th edition; DSM-5 ) criteria. 15 Six or more symptoms must be present in multiple settings and negatively affect social, academic. or occupational functioning for more than 6 months and before age 12. 16 Revised diagnostic criteria in the DSM-5 resulted in an increased number of females diagnosed with ADHD symptoms due to an inattentive presentation of symptoms. 10

Using mental health professionals in addition to primary care providers is fundamental to addressing possible underlying mental health concerns. Comorbidity of ADHD and psychiatric diagnoses such as depression or anxiety can affect up to 50% of children. Children with comorbid conditions may experience increased social isolation and educational impairments and require referrals for mental health services. 17 Having a co-occurring mental health diagnosis may place individuals at greater risk for abuse potential. Comorbidity could impede treatment and response to substance recovery efforts. 18

Controversy continues surrounding the implications of stimulant use and potential for substance use disorders. Studies suggest protective factors associated with stimulant use reduced substance abuse as patients ' mental health needs were appropriately addressed. The long-term use of ADHD medication decreased the rate of substance use for approximately 4 years and concluded by indicating clinicians should remain attentive to issues surrounding diversion. 11 Medication therapy does not increase risk for substance use and prompt initiation of treatment for ADHD bene /uniFB01 ts an individual ' s mental health and protects patients from later substance abuse. 19

Stimulants increase norepinephrine and dopamine actions to address hallmark symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention. The pharmacological mechanism of these medications is similar to illicit substances cocaine and methamphetamine. 20 Additionally, individuals may experience issues around executive performance and emotional sensitivity which affect social, educational, and occupational interactions. 21 Consequently, disturbances with limited executive functioning, issues with self-restraint, academic de /uniFB01 ciencies and inability to self-regulate may lead to developing substance use disorders. 22

Adverse implications highlight new behaviors of misuse and abuse are harmful and potentially lead to substance use disorders. Substance use is an emerging threat and public health issue affecting the health of young adults, families, and communities. 23 Patterns of misuse have centered on stimulant use to improve grades and enhance academic opportunities. Students have obtained stimulant medications related to societal and parental pressure to excel academically. Research addresses the popular thought of stimulant medications as low risk and challenge expectations of academic bene /uniFB01 t with stimulant use. 24 Dangers for students include not taking medication as prescribed, sharing with peers, and using stimulants in combination with alcohol or illicit substances. Consequences of perceptions of decreased dangerousness such as accidental poisonings related to misuse of nonprescription stimulants have risen as well. 25 Clinicians are becoming concerned about the over-diagnosis of ADHD related to academic performance and the subsequent request for stimulants.

## Clinical Implications

The American Academy of Pediatrics released clinical guidelines for the treatment of ADHD for children and adolescents, Process of Care Algorithm. 26 Nurse practitioners are increasingly the primary care providers for these patients. Clinical treatment will vary according to the provider ' s practice and may incorporate medication and nonmedication regimens. Behavioral interventions are recommendedforpreschool-age children. It is incumbent on clinicians in primary care, clinics, and private practice settings working with children and adolescents to remain informed regarding evidencedbased practices for prescribing. These include ensuring an accurate ADHD diagnosis, screening for alcohol and illicit substances, and maintaining detailed documentation. 27 For children and adolescents requiring further ADHD symptomatology support with a comorbid psychiatric diagnosis, collaborating with psychiatric mental health nurse practitioners adheres to best practice management of behavioral therapy and medication treatment. Treating only one component of a complex diagnosis minimizes optimal health management and referral to specialty practice is recommended to reduce higher rates of service utilization. 17

Assessments will need to incorporate a physical examination, noting possible symptoms of stimulant abuse: tremors, pupillary dilation, increased re /uniFB02 exes, changes to blood pressure or heart rate, weight loss, or increased agitation. 16 Clinicians must question incidences of risky behaviors, such as driving under the in /uniFB02 uence, addressing unsafe sexual behaviors, and initiating illicit substance usage. Primary care providers may want to ascertain recent emergency department visits; answers may yield information regarding current level of functioning. It is important for all providers interacting with patients prescribed stimulants to ask about prescribed medication adherence and verify prescriptions each visit via local/ state prescription and drug monitoring programs. Clinicians should remain aware of prescribed medications and abuse potential List of Most Commonly Used Medications for ADHD With Suspected Relative Abuse Potential. 27 Employing medication regimen changes is crucial if misuse or diversion is suspected. Changes may include switching patient to a nonstimulant or a long-acting stimulant, conducting random urine screens, or implementing medication contracts. Mental health providers are noted to implement active prevention practices compared with other health care specialities. 4 Clinicians now have a wide variety of evidence-based guidelines, publications, and complementary downloads to address growing stimulant abuse concerns.

Anticipatory guidance is crucial for both parents and students. Existing gaps have been identi /uniFB01 ed to make students, parents, and providers aware of the dangers of stimulant abuse. If age appropriate, prepare to discuss safety with parents Discussion Points for Anticipatory Guidance Regarding Stimulants and Substance Use. 27 Many providers advocate implementing universal preventative substance abuse plans when patients are initially prescribed medication. 28

Parents must be educated to the consequences of nonprescription drug use, which may include dangerous driving, elevated risk of unsafe sexual practices, and graduating to illicit substances. Providers must be aware of potential abuse activities, such as

requesting medication re /uniFB01 lls early and reporting lost or misplaced prescriptions. Awareness is vital for students, parents and clinicians because failure to address risky behaviors could result in tragic consequences associated with stimulant abuse. 29

College student counseling centers in close proximity to hospitals may partner to focus on a multidisciplinary approach to coordinate treatment. Establishing mutual lines of communication concentrates available resources, in /uniFB02 uences prevention efforts, and promotes safety concerns. Student counseling centers may be an individual ' s /uniFB01 rst line of defense when initial misuse begins. Screening practices will need to incorporate discussions addressing risky behaviors. Many student counseling centers providing prescriptions adhere to guidelines via medication agreements. These agreements highlight procedures to ensure the safe management of ADHD medications. They also provide referral services if substance abuse treatment is needed. The Coalition to Prevent ADHD Medication Misuse, launched in 2016, is an online resource for academic administrators, medical providers, and athletic staff to initiate discussions to prevent misuse, abuse, and diversion of prescribed stimulants. 30

If the preceding actions are unsuccessful in engaging patients, providers may initiate harm reduction as an intervention. Harm reduction as a technique attempts to limit damaging health and social outcomes for individuals who chose to continue to engage in unsafe practices and risky behaviors. 31 Harm reduction as an intervention continues to be controversial because opponents believe it allows the abuser to minimize the need for treatment. Supporters counter that harm reduction is individualized to support /uniFB02 exibility in engaging those in need of treatment. 32 Research highlights this approach speci /uniFB01 cally for risky behaviors related to tobacco use and addiction. Individuals are held accountable for their actions without termination of health care. 33 Clinicians familiar with this modality may recommend available resources or implement evidence-based practices for supporting prevention and providing treatment interventions or referrals to addiction services. Emergency department providers are in a unique position to employ harm reduction techniques while performing SAMSHA ' s easily implemented evidenced-based tool, Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT). 34 Emergency clinicians are able to offer reliable information about health concerns for individuals seeking treatment for consequences leading to emergency department visits associated with stimulant abuse in a brief, constructive manner. 35

## Conclusion

When used as prescribed, stimulants are highly effective for addressing ADHD symptoms. However, there is a potentially serious public health crisis on the horizon, given the continued rise of young adults misusing and abusing prescribed stimulants. Access, bias, of /uniFB01 ce-visits time constraints and lack of familiarity with resources lessens prescriber opportunities to address misuse, abuse, and risky behaviors associated with stimulant use. The level of acceptance for misuse remains a dangerous reality because many students, parents, and clinicians perceive stimulants as safe and the misuse is not categorized in the same way that opiate abuse is seen and acted upon. Clinicians maintain responsibility for discussing substance use while conducting clinical assessments. Future implications for research are wide and could target executive functioning, academic performance, and interventions related to diversion or determine individuals at elevated risk of stimulant misuse and abuse. Without interventions, risky behaviors will continue to escalate, creating dangerous consequences for individuals, families, and communities.

## References

1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2020. https:// www.healthypeople.gov/. Accessed November 26, 2018.
2. Reid A, Graziano P, Geffken G, McNamara J, Cottler L, Meneses E, et al. Frequent nonprescription stimulant use and risky behaviors in college students: the role of effortful control. J Am Coll Health. 2015;63(1):23-30.
3. Results from the 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/ default/ /uniFB01 les/NSDUH-FFR1-2016/NSDUH-FFR1-2016.pdf. Accessed November 26, 2018.
4. Colaneri N, Keim S, Adesman A. Physician practices to prevent ADHD stimulant diversion and misuse. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2017;74:26-34.
5. Wilens TE, Adler LA, Adams J, Sgambati S, Rotrosen J, Sawtelle R, et al. Misuse and diversion of stimulants prescribed for ADHD: a systematic review of the literature. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;1:21-31.
6. Monitoring the Future. National Institute on Drug Abuse. https:// www.drugabuse.gov/related-topics/trends-statistics/monitoring-future#2015monitoring-the-future-survey. Accessed November 27, 2018.
7. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health, United States, 2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/ hus16.pdf#050. Accessed November 27, 2018
8. Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/ /uniFB01 les/nsduh-frr1-2014/nsduhfrr1-2014.pdf. Accessed November 26, 2018
9. American College Health Association. National College Health Assessment II: Reference Group Undergraduates Executive Summary Fall 2016. American College Health Association. http://www.acha-ncha.org/docs/ncha-ii\_fall\_2016\_ reference\_group\_executive\_summary.pdf. Accessed November 26, 2018.
10. Xu G, Strathearn L, Liu B, Yang B, Bao W. Twenty-year trends in diagnosed attention- de /uniFB01 cit/hyperactivity disorder among US children and adolescents, 1997 e 2016. JAMA Network Open. 2018;1(4):e181471.
11. Chang Z, Lichtenstein P, Halldner L, D'Onofrio B, Serlachius E, Fazel S, et al. Stimulant ADHD medication and risk for substance abuse. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2014;55(8):878-885.
12. Clemow D, Walker D. The potential for misuse and abuse of medications in ADHD: a review. Postgrad Med. 2014;126(5):64-81.
13. Misuse of Prescription Drugs. National Institute on Drug Abuse. https:// www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/misuse-prescription-drugs. Accessed November 26, 2018.
14. Bachmann CJ, Wijlaars LP, Kalverdijk LJ, Burcu M, Glaeske G, Schuiling-Veninga CC, et al. Trends in ADHD medication use in children and adolescents in /uniFB01 ve Western countries, 2005 e 2012. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017;27:484-493.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018. Symptoms and Diagnosis. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/diagnosis.html. Accessed November 26, 2018.
16. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
17. Al Ghriwati N, Langberg JM, Gardner W, Peugh J, Kelleher KJ, Baum R, et al. Impact of mental health comorbidities on the community-based pediatric treatment and outcomes of children with attention de /uniFB01 cit hyperactivity disorder. J Dev Behav Ped. 2017;(1):20.
18. Warden D, Riggs PD, Min S-J, Mikulich-Gilbertson SK, Tamm L, Trello-Rishel K, et al. Major depression and treatment response in adolescents with ADHD and substance use disorder. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2012;120:214-219.
19. McCabe S, Dickinson K, West B, Wilens T. New research: age of onset, duration, and type of medication therapy for attention-de /uniFB01 cit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use during adolescence: a multi-cohort national study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016;55:479-486.
20. Gallucci A, Martin R, Beaujean A, Usdan S. An examination of the misuse of prescription stimulants among college students using the theory of planned behavior. Psychol Health Med. 2015;20(2):217-226.
21. Mattingly GW, Anderson RH. Optimizing outcomes in ADHD treatment: from clinical targets to novel delivery systems. CNS Spectrums. 2016;(suppl 1):45.
22. Wilens TE, Carrellas NW, Martelon M, et al. Neuropsychological functioning in college students who misuse prescription stimulants. Am J Addict. 2017;26(4): 379-387.
23. A day in the life of college students aged 18 to 22: substance use facts. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/ /uniFB01 les/report\_2361/ ShortReport-2361.html.Accessed November 26, 2018
24. Arria AM, Geisner IM, Cimini MD, Kilmer JR, Caldeira KM, Barrall AL, et al. Perceived academic bene /uniFB01 t is associated with nonmedical prescription stimulant use among college students. Addict Behav. 2018;76:27-33. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.addbeh.2017.07.013.
25. Benotsch E, Koester S, Martin A, Cejka A, Luckman D, Jeffers A. Intentional misuse of over-the-counter medications, mental health, and polysubstance use in young adults. J Commun Health. 2014;39(4):688-695.
26. American Academy of Pediatrics. Implementing the Key Action Statements: An Algorithm and Explanation for Process of Care for the Evaluation, Diagnosis, Treatment, and Monitoring of ADHD in Children and Adolescent. Pediatrics . 2011;128:1007-1022.

27. Harstad E, Levy S. Attention-de /uniFB01 cit/hyperactivity disorder and substance abuse d Committee on Substance Abuse. Pediatrics. 2014;134: e293-e301.
28. Spoth R, Trudeau L, Redmond C, Shin C. Replicating and extending a model of effects of universal preventive intervention during early adolescence on young adult substance misuse. J Consult Clini Psychol. 2016;84(10):913-921.
29. Gomes J, Song T, Godwin L, Toriello P. Prescription stimulant abuse on university campuses. J Human Behav Social Environ. 2011;21(7): 822-833.
30. The Coalition to Prevent ADHD Medication Misuse. http://www.cpamm.org/. Accessed November 26, 2018
31. Drucker E, Anderson K, Haemmig R, Heimer R, Small D, Walley A, et al. Treating addictions: harm reduction in clinical care and prevention. J Bioethic Inquiry. 2016;(2):239.
32. Bayles C. Using mindfulness in a harm reduction approach to substance abuse treatment: a literature review. Int J Behav Consult Ther. 2014;9(2):22-25.
33. Hawk M, Coulter R, Egan J, Fisk S, Friedman M, Tula M, et al. Harm reduction principles for healthcare settings. Harm Reduction J. 2017;14:1-9.
34. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2005). SBIRT: Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment. https:// www.integration.samhsa.gov/clinical-practice/sbirt. Accessed November 26, 2018.
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Health, United States, 2016 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus16.pdf#050. Accessed November 26, 2018.

Kamala D. Via, MSN, PMHNP, is a psychiatric nurse practitioner at The Center for Eating Disorders, Towson, MD and adjunct faculty at Howard Community College in Columbia, MD. She can be reached at kamalavia@gmail.com.

In compliance with national ethical guidelines, the author reports no relationships with business or industry that would pose a con /uniFB02 ict of interest.