## Defining the Contribution of Genetic Risk to Structural and Functional Anomalies in ADHD

JUDITH L. RAPOPORT, M.D., AND PHILIP SHAW, M.D., PH.D.

In this month \_ s issue of the Journal , Durston and colleagues 1 report the patterns of brain activation during a classic task of cognitive control V inhibiting a response V in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), their unaffected siblings, and healthy controls. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, they report that a variant of the dopamine transporter gene associated with ADHD has similar effects, increasing activation in the striatum in children with ADHD and their unaffected siblings, but not in healthy children in whom no such gene effect is seen. In a second study by Mulder et al., 2 the same research group used a variant of the response inhibition task, which includes a timing manipulation that robustly activates the cerebellum. They report that both children with ADHD and their unaffected siblings show a similar underactivation of the cerebellum compared to healthy controls. This latter finding is surprising because normal cerebellar activation among the unaffected siblings was predicted, in keeping with their structurally normal cerebellum.

The context for these studies is the burgeoning literature during the past 2 decades demonstrating subtle neuroanatomic and functional metabolic abnormalities in ADHD. 3,4 The establishment of several replicable candidate risk genes paralleled these findings. 5 Both these independent lines of inquiry received considerable attention because they provided increasingly solid evidence of biological mediation of this common disorder. Although the entire brain appears to be affected in ADHD to some extent, some regions seem particularly compromised: the prefrontal cortex, striatum, and cerebellum. 6 Durston

Accepted September 4, 2007.

Drs. Rapoport and Shaw are with the National Institute of Mental Health. Correspondence to Dr. Judith Rapoport, National Institute of Mental Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892; e-mail: rapoporj@mail.nih.gov. DOI: 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815aac83

and colleagues take the next logical step and examine both genetic and imaging factors in a single study.

This group has adopted the strategy of examining structural and functional neural changes in the unaffected siblings of children with ADHD, who, although free of symptoms of the disorder, nonetheless share the genetic risk. The group previously reported a decrease in the volume of the striatum in both those with ADHD and their unaffected siblings. 7 Now they extend this work examining the effects of the most common polymorphism of the dopamine transporter 1 gene (DAT1) on striatal activation during a task of response inhibition. In the basic paradigm, children are instructed to press a button when they see one stimulus (the go task), but to withhold a response when they see a less frequently occurring different stimulus (the no-go). Interest in the dopamine receptor transport gene stems from the likely mode of action of methylphenidate, blocking the reuptake of dopamine at presynaptic receptor sites. The 10-repeat allele of a variable number tandem repeat within the DAT1 gene has been proposed as a risk factor for ADHD, albeit with inconsistent results. 5 More recently, it has been suggested that possession of the 10-repeat form may confer a distinct neuropsychological 8 and pharmacological profile in ADHD. 9 Durston and colleagues extend the proposed phenotype by showing that being homozygous for the 10-repeat allele was associated with decreased activation during response inhibition in the cerebellar vermis in all subjects, but an increase in activation in the striatum was confined to those with ADHD and their unaffected siblings and not present in healthy controls. In short, being at genetic risk for ADHD was enough to alter striatal activation in the complete absence of symptoms of ADHD. The authors draw an interesting parallel between the effects of the 10repeat allele and methylphenidate V both may effectively increase synaptic dopamine, the former by

being less biologically active and the latter by blocking dopamine reuptake action. In this regard, it is interesting to note that methylphenidate may have differing effects on striatal activation in children with ADHD and in healthy controls. 10

The cerebellum mediates a host of cognitive functions and is increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of ADHD. 11 A decrease in cerebellar volume is one of the most consistent findings in the field, and previous work from Durston and colleagues suggests that this is related to diagnosis, not genetic risk, because unaffected siblings did not show volume loss. 6,7 In addition, their first study summarized above found that the risk allele of the DAT1 gene had the same effects on cerebellar activation in those with and without ADHD. Such findings lead us to expect that cerebellar anomalies are linked with disorder per se (i.e., a state feature) rather than reflecting genetic risk (a trait). The experimental design in this second study incorporated a clever twist to the basic go/no-go paradigm, having the stimuli occur at both expected and unexpected intervals. The cerebellum is known to be exquisitely sensitive to such manipulations of timing. The findings of the study are surprising: Unaffected siblings showed similar anomalous activation to their affected siblings in the cerebellum when processing a stimulus presented at an unexpected interval. It is tricky to explain the apparently discrepant finding, but perhaps regional specificity is at play. In their earlier volumetric work, Durston and colleagues only measured the entire cerebellum and thus may have missed more regional volume loss in the components of the cerebellum in unaffected siblings. In addition, the localization of activation associated with the violation of a temporal expectancy in the second study differs in small but potentially significant ways from the cerebellar activation associated with unexpected stimulus identity in the first study. In initial analyses of healthy monozygotic and dizygotic twins, our group has found that the heritability of the various components of the cerebellum varies considerably (R. Lenroot, M.D., personal communication, 2007). Also, in ADHD we found that although vermal volume loss in ADHD was relatively fixed, changes in the lateral cerebellar hemispheres were more plastic and varied with clinical outcome. 12 Thus, it is possible that some regions of the cerebellum in ADHD will show structural and functional effects of genetic risk, and others will not.

By using an unaffected sibling design, the series of elegant studies by Durston and colleagues initially unravel the effects of trait and state. They then proceed to bind together the structural anomalies associated with genotype reported in their earlier studies, such as volume reduction in the striatum, with associated functional effects. Such work may help refine the phenotype of ADHD and perhaps inform the prediction of outcome and more rational individualized treatment.

Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

## REFERENCES

1. Durston S, Fossella JA, Mulder MJ, et al. Dopamine-transporter genotype conveys familial risk for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder through striatal activation. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47:62 Y 68.
2. Mulder MJ, Baeyens D, Davidson MC, et al. Familial vulnerability for ADHD affects activity in cerebellum in addition to prefrontal systems. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47:69 Y 76.
3. Zametkin AJ, Nordahl TE, Gross M, et al. Cerebral glucose metabolism in adults with hyperactivity of childhood onset. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:1361 Y 1366.
4. Castellanos FX, Lee PP, Sharp W, et al. Developmental trajectories of brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA. 2002;288:1740 Y 1748.
5. Faraone SV, Khan SA. Candidate gene studies of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(Suppl 8):13 Y 20.
6. Durston S. A review of the biological bases of ADHD: what have we learned from imaging studies? Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2003;9:184 Y 195.
7. Durston S, Hulshoff Pol HE, Schnack HG, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of boys with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and their unaffected siblings. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004;43: 332 Y 340.
8. Mill J, Caspi A, Williams BS, et al. Prediction of heterogeneity in intelligence and adult prognosis by genetic polymorphisms in the dopamine system among children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: evidence from 2 birth cohorts. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63: 462 Y 469.
9. Bellgrove MA, Hawi Z, Kirley A, et al. Association between dopamine transporter (DAT1) genotype, left-sided inattention, and an enhanced response to methylphenidate in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology . 2005;30:2290 Y 2297.
10. Vaidya CJ, Austin G, Kirkorian G, et al. Selective effects of methylphenidate in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a functional magnetic resonance study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95: 14494 Y 14499.
11. Desmond JE. Neuroimaging studies of the cerebellum: language, learning, and memory. Trends Cogn Sci. 1998;2:355 Y 362.
12. Mackie S, Shaw P, Lenroot R, et al. Cerebellar development and clinical outcome in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:647 Y 655.