<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Journal of Experimental Social Psychology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jesp

## When more is less: Self-control strategies are seen as less indicative of self-control than just willpower ☆

Anamarie Gennara, Johanna Peetz * , Marina Milyavskaya

Department of Psychology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Dr, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6, Canada

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: Lay beliefs Self-control Self-regulation Strategies Willpower

## A B S T R A C T

People may suppress temptations with pure willpower or use strategies to reduce their pull. In this paper, we examine lay theories about self-control strategy use. A fictional person described as a high self-control individual was seen as more likely to use willpower than strategies (Experiment 1). In four other experiments, targets described as using strategies were perceived as relatively lower in self-control than those using willpower (Experiments 2 -5). This difference disappeared for participants who scored high on a scale assessing the belief that strategies are indicative of self-control (Experiment 4) and was reduced for those who were assigned to read an article about self-control strategies rather than about willpower (Experiment 5). Strategy beliefs were also linked to more intentions to use strategies (Experiments 4 -5). We conclude that willpower is more central to people ' s idea of self-control than strategies, and that this lay belief affects person perception and behavioral intentions.

People  encounter  temptations  frequently  in their lives.  From tempting food when trying to eat healthy, to tempting distractions at work and tempting sales offers when saving, people have to regulate their responses. There are many ways to make goal-orientated rather than temptation-oriented decisions. Imagine Jamie who sets up his life in a way that makes temptations less likely -he takes the long way to work to avoid the tempting candy shop, turns off his phone to prevent distractions at work, and has set up rewards and penalties for himself to regulate his spending. In contrast, Alex uses pure willpower to suppress these  temptations and act in line with her goals.  Regardless of their success at self-regulation, will Jamie or Alex be seen as having better self-control? In the present experiments we examine lay beliefs about the use of self-control strategies as more or less indicative of self-control, as well as consequences of this belief.

## 1. Willpower and strategies

Several decades of research examined willpower as the capacity to suppress  tempting  impulses,  equalizing  self-control  with  willpower (Baumeister &amp; Heatherton, 1996; Hofmann, Friese, &amp; Strack, 2009). In other words, people with higher trait self-control were seen as being better at suppressing temptations through the use of their willpower, an effortful and potentially depleting process (Baumeister, Vohs, &amp; Tice,

☆ This paper has been recommended for acceptance by Dr Karina Schumann.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

anamarie.gennara@carleton.ca (A. Gennara), johanna.peetz@carleton.ca (J. Peetz), marina.milyavskaya@carleton.ca (M. Milyavskaya).

2007). Plenty of evidence has shown that willpower can indeed help people exert self-control and achieve their goals (de Ridder, LensveltMulders,  Finkenauer,  Stok, &amp; Baumeister,  2012;  Mischel,  Shoda, &amp; Rodriguez,  1989;  Tangney,  Baumeister, &amp; Boone,  2004).  However, recent theories of self-control have shifted to go beyond willpower to include strategies -the actions and thoughts people take to design their environment in a way that make goal-directed choices easier and more likely (Duckworth, Milkman, &amp; Laibson, 2018; Fujita, Orvell, &amp; Kross, 2020; Gillebaart &amp; de Ridder, 2015; Hennecke &amp; Bürgler, 2020). Some strategies might be employed to avoid or change a self-regulation situation  (situational  strategies),  and  some  might  be  employed  to  direct attention  or  thoughts  during  the  situation  (intrapsychic  strategies), (Duckworth,  Gendler, &amp; Gross,  2014;  Duckworth,  White,  Matteucci, Shearer, &amp; Gross, 2016; Gross, 2015). For example, a person with the goal to lose weight who is facing a temptation such as delicious cookies might put the cookies out of reach (i.e.,  modifying  the  situation)  or might think of ways to make the cookie less appealing, such as calling to mind their weight goal or pretending the cookie is plastic (i.e., intrapsychic strategies). Arguably, employing self-control strategies is less effortful than applying strength of will, and could be a more sustainable way to self-control (e.g., see research on 'nudges ' , Leonard, Thaler, &amp; Sunstein, 2008; also see Duckworth, Taxer, Eskreis-Winkler, Galla, &amp; Gross, 2019; Hennecke &amp; Bürgler, 2020; Inzlicht, Werner, Briskin, &amp;

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Roberts, 2021 for reviews). People high in trait self-control do tend to use more strategies such as avoiding temptations (Ent, Baumeister, &amp; Tice, 2015), choosing a less distracting work environment (Ent et al., 2015;  Leduc-Cummings,  Werner,  Milyavskaya,  Dominick, &amp; Cole, 2022), and forming more implementation intentions (Werner, Sjåstad, Milyavskaya, &amp; Hofmann, 2020) than people low in trait self-control. In sum, the current empirical literature supports the view of self-control strategy use as being characteristic of individuals high in self-control.

## 2. Lay beliefs about self-control strategies

Do lay individuals ' beliefs  about  self-control  strategies  match  the current  science?  In  the  present  paper  we  examine  lay  beliefs  about whether using self-control strategies is seen as indicative of good or poor self-control. On the one hand, people might recognize the self-control value  of  strategies.  Many  people  report  regularly  using  strategies  in their  daily  life  when  these  strategies  are  described  and  they  are prompted to indicate use (e.g., Hennecke, Czikmantori, &amp; Brandst ¨ atter, 2019; Milyavskaya, Saunders, &amp; Inzlicht, 2021), although this number is much  lower  when  strategies  are  freely  recalled  rather  than  selected (Milyavskaya &amp; Nadolny, 2018). The experience of successful self-control through strategy use might shape beliefs about these actions and thoughts, and people might recognize the link between strategy use and high self-control. On the other hand, people might regard strategy use  as  a  crutch,  something  needed  only  when  true  willpower  is  not sufficient.  Indeed,  a  qualitative  study  on  smoking  cessation  (Smith, Carter,  Chapman,  Dunlop, &amp; Freeman,  2015)  reported  that  former smokers believed that seeking assistance from practitioners or support groups would be seen as a sign of weakness compared to choosing to quit 'cold turkey ' (i.e., relying on their willpower to quit). Behavior modification  programs  addressing  self-control  problems  such  as  gambling (Griffiths, Wood, &amp; Parke, 2009) or psychotherapy (Gulliver, Griffiths, &amp; Christensen, 2010) have been shown to be stigmatized as being only relevant to those who ' need it ' or those low on innate self-control. Thus, it is also possible that lay people perceive the use of self-control strategies as indicative of low self-control.

There are few studies that have examined beliefs about self-control strategies directly. In a set of studies comparing the perceived implications of using different types of self-control strategies, Bermúdez, Murray, Chartrand, and Barbosa (2021) found that a fictional student was rated as better on self-control and related concepts when she suppressed the impulse  on  willpower  alone  and  when  she  used  reappraisal  (i.e.,  an intrapsychic strategy) than when she distracted herself or used situation modification to stick to her studying goal. This study suggests that lay theories about self-control strategies might link some strategy use to relatively worse self-control.

Another set of studies examined the folk concept of self-control while pitching two types of control against each other (Irving, Bridges, Glasser, Bermúdez, &amp; Sripada, 2022): using willpower to resist temptation in the moment  (labelled  synchronic  regulation)  versus  using  willpower  to resist  anticipated,  future  temptation  (labelled  diachronic  regulation). Across a variety of temptation scenarios, Irving and colleagues found that participants used primarily information about immediate willpower use when making self-control judgments. For example, someone using willpower to give away a tasty food to a roommate instead of eating it for  their  own  lunch  today  was  rated  as  higher  in  self-control  than someone using willpower to give away the food instead of saving it for their own lunch tomorrow. Thus, these studies also suggested that lay theories about self-control strategies might link some strategy use (e.g., diachronic regulation for delayed temptation) to relatively poorer selfcontrol.

## 3. Why do lay beliefs matter?

Implicit  theories  can  have  powerful  effects  on  cognition  and behavior.  For  example,  beliefs  about  whether  abilities  are  fixed  or malleable  can  affect  reactions  to  failure  (Dweck &amp; Leggett,  1988; Mueller &amp; Dweck, 1998) such as bouncing back after dieting setbacks (Burnette &amp; Finkel, 2012). Similarly, beliefs about whether willpower is a limited resource that is depleted after exertion or not can affect one ' s ability  to  employ  successful  self-control  (Francis &amp; Job,  2018;  Job, Dweck, &amp; Walton, 2010). For instance, students who held non-limited theories  of  willpower  in  the  weeks  before  final  exams  ate  fewer  unhealthy  foods,  experienced  less  procrastination,  and  made  greater progress in their achievement goals relative to students who held limited theories of willpower (Job et al., 2010, Study 4). In a similar way, lay beliefs about strategy use as part of self-control may be directly related to a person ' s willingness to use strategies -if Jamie believes that using strategies is indicative of good self-control, he should be more willing to use those strategies himself, compared to Alex, who believes that using strategies  reflects  poor  self-control.  Indeed,  views  of  strategy  use  as indicative of poor self-control might represent a barrier to successful self-control. Smokers who are more resistant to using strategies other than  willpower  to  quit  smoking  due  to  perceiving  these  strategies  a weakness (Smith et al., 2015) miss out on some of the tools of selfcontrol.

Lay beliefs about whether strategy use is indicative of good or poor self-control  might  also  affect  how  people  judge  those  they  see  using strategies. People with high self-control tend to be viewed by others as more  likeable,  trustworthy,  and  reliable  (Peetz &amp; Kammrath,  2011; Righetti &amp; Finkenauer,  2011;  R ¨ oseler,  Ebert,  Schütz, &amp; Baumeister, 2021). For example, persons high in self-control are better liked and preferred as a dating partner (R ¨ oseler et al., 2021; Shea, Davisson, &amp; Fitzsimons, 2013). If the use of everyday self-control strategies such as placing the alarm on the other side of the room to get out of bed in the morning, paying into a swear-jar to reduce foul language, or rewarding oneself after finishing an important work deadline is linked to other ' s perception of one ' s self-control, this can have important social consequences. If Alex believes that using such strategies implies poorer selfcontrol, he might be less willing to befriend Jamie, who manages her life via multiple self-control strategies. Indeed, existing research already suggests that people might perceive fictional individuals using commitment-based self-control strategies as less trustworthy than individuals  depicted  as  using  willpower  only  (Kristal &amp; Zlatev,  2021). Specifically, participants expressed reluctance to use a commitment selfcontrol strategy (a commitment contract website, a web blocker app, or a lock box) if the decision to use this strategy would be made public rather than kept private (Kristal &amp; Zlatev, 2021). According to the authors, the findings suggest that people may be aware of the negative social consequences of using commitment strategies and are thus hesitant to do so. In sum, lay beliefs about whether self-control strategies are indicative of relatively better or worse self-control may affect person perception.

## 4. Overview of the present experiments

Across five experiments, we examined participants ' lay beliefs about self-control strategy use and perceived trait self-control. A first experiment  tested  whether  someone  described  as  having  high  self-control would be seen as more or less likely to use strategies (Experiment 1), three experiments tested whether a person described as using strategies versus described as using pure willpower to control temptations would be judged as relatively lower or higher in trait self-control (Experiment 2 -4), and two experiments tested the role of strategy beliefs as a predictor  of  participants ' own  intentions  to  use  strategies,  both  when assessed as self-report (Experiment 4) and when manipulated experimentally (Experiment 5). Using a newly designed scale to assess explicit lay  beliefs  of  strategy  use  and  willpower  (Experiments  4  and  5),  we hypothesize that lay beliefs link the use of self-control strategies with relatively poorer self-control than the use of willpower. We further hypothesize that the stronger this belief (that willpower is more indicative of  self-control  than  strategies),  the  less  self-control  someone  might

ascribe to someone else using self-control strategies and the less likely they are to intend to use strategies themselves.

These  experiments  expand on  existing  research  by  examining  lay beliefs about self-control strategies. Regardless of the actual benefits of strategies for goal-oriented behavior, people ' s beliefs about what using strategies means might affect how they perceive others who use strategies and their own intentions to use strategies. The present experiments test lay beliefs about strategies and willpower in general terms, rather than comparing beliefs about specific types of strategies (cf. Bermúdez et al., 2021; Irving et al., 2022).

Participants  for  all  experiments  were  recruited  through  crowdsourced samples. Several precautions were taken to ensure data quality: participants had passed Cloudresearch ' s or Prolific Academic ' s validity checks, were from U.S. and Canada only, completed a reCAPTCHA box, and completed an open-ended attention check. Sample size was determined before any data analysis. Samples are described in Table 1. In these experiments, we report all measures, manipulations, and exclusions. Full materials, data and syntax for all experiments are available on OSF: https://osf.io/6ezsk/.

## 5. Experiment 1

This  initial  experiment  examined  whether  people  might  ascribe different types of self-regulation behaviors to individuals who are high or low in self-control. Would a high self-control individual be seen as more likely to use willpower to suppress temptations, and less likely to use strategies to reduce temptations or distract the self from temptations,  than  a  low  self-control  individual?  This  experiment  was  not preregistered.

## 5.1. Method

After  reporting  demographic  information,  participants  were  presented with the descriptions of a person high in self-control ( ' This is A. A

Table 1 Participant descriptives across experiments.

|               | Design                                                                                                             | Recruitment          | % exclusions   |   Final N | Mean age in years (SD), range   | Gender                                          | Ethnicity                                                                                               |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------|-----------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Experiment 1  | 2 within-subject (high vs low self- control)                                                                       | Cloudesearch/ MTurk  | 13%            |       100 | 36.46 (8.97) 23 - 66            | 31% women 68% men 1% nonbinary                  | 76.5% White; 9.6% Black 10.4% Asian; 3.5% Hispanic; 1.7% Indigenous; 0.9% Middle Eastern                |
| Experiment 2* | 2 within-subject (willpower vs strategies) × 5 within-subject (vignettes)                                          | Cloudresearch/ MTurk | 1%             |       199 | 44.81 (12.94) 20 - 77           | 47.7% women 50.8% men 1.5% nonbinary or n/a     | 76.4% White; 7.5% Black 6.5% Asian; 5.5% Hispanic; 0.5% Indigenous; 2% Multiracial or Mixed; 1.5% Other |
| Experiment 3* | 3 between-subject (willpower vs. strategies vs. control)                                                           | Cloudresearch/ MTurk | 6%             |       267 | 40.60 (11.51) 19 - 74           | 47.2% women 52.8% men                           | 80.9% White; 12.7% Back; 4.5 Asian; 4.5% Hispanic; 0.7% Indigenous; 0.4% Middle Eastern                 |
| Experiment 4* | Continuous (beliefs scale) × 3 between- subject (willpower vs. strategies vs. control) × 2 between-subject (order) | Cloudresearch/ MTurk | 1%             |       443 | 42.30 (13.08) 19 - 74           | 54.4% women 44.5% men 1.1% nonbinary or         | 80.1% White; 9.7% Black 7.4% Asian; 6.1% Hispanic; 2.5% Indigenous; 0.5% Middle Eastern 0.4% Other      |
| Pilot         | 2 between-subject (beliefs conditions)                                                                             | Prolific Academic    | 3%             |        98 | 27.31 (7.88) 18 - 52            | 56.3% women 41.7% men 2.1% nonbinary or         | 51% White; 14% Black 2% Asian; 24.5% Hispanic; 1% Multiracial or Mixed; 5% Other                        |
| Experiment 5* | 2 between-subject (beliefs conditions)                                                                             | Prolific Academic    | 0%             |       270 | 36.37 (13.26) 18 - 81           | n/a 66.8% women 29.9% men 2.9% nonbinary or n/a | 77.9% White; 3.3% Black 11.1% Asian; 2.6% Hispanic; 3.7% Multiracial or Mixed, 1.1% Other               |

Note . * Preregistered. Compensation at US$6.5 hourly rate for Cloudresearch and US$7.1 hourly rate for Prolific Academic. Exclusions were based on an open-ended attention check that read ' Explain your reasoning ' after the main dependent variable. Average word count of participants ' open-ended responses was 24 (Experiment

1), 31 (Experiment 2), 25 (Experiment 3), 28 (Experiment 4), and 25 (Experiment 5), respectively.

is very good at resisting temptations. He refuses to do things that are bad for him and is very good at working towards long-term goals. People say he has iron self-discipline, because he never says inappropriate things and thinks through all the alternatives before acting. ' ) and a person low in self-control ( ' This is B. B often gives in to temptations. He does things that are bad for him if they are fun, and pleasure and fun sometimes keep him from getting work done. People say he lacks self-discipline, because he often has trouble concentrating and can ' t stop himself from doing something even if he knows it ' s wrong. ' ). The hypothetical persons in the vignette were gender-matched to the participant, with the one nonbinary participant reading about two female persons. Descriptions were based on the items of the Trait Self-Control Scale (Tangney et al., 2004).

Participants were then asked, ' Who do you think is more likely to do each behavior? ' and sorted 20 behaviors into a box labelled ' A ' or a box labelled ' B. ' Of these behaviors, five items were describing the exertion of willpower (e.g., ' controls themselves by sheer willpower when faced with a temptation. ' ), five items were describing strategy use (e.g., ' takes detour rather than walking by a tempting store. ' ), and ten items were distractor  items  (e.g., ' likes  to  draw  bird  watercolor  pictures. ' ).  We calculated the percentage of the behaviors ascribed to each person that were strategy items and the percentage of the behaviors ascribed that were willpower items.

## 5.2. Results and discussion

Paired-test comparisons showed that participants thought the person described as having high self-control would be more likely to use willpower (90% attributed to A, 10% attributed to B, t (100) = 17.46, p &lt; .001, d = 1.74) and more  likely  to  use  self-control  strategies  (83% attributed to A, 17% attributed to B, t (100) = 12.71, p &lt; .001, d = 1.26) than the person described as having low self-control. However, participants did also think that a low-self-control person would be more likely to use strategies than willpower (17% vs 10%, t (100) = 2.48, p = .015, d = 0.25). This analysis had 80% power to detect an effect size of d = 0.25.

In sum, high self-control individuals are seen as both using their willpower and strategies more than a low self-control individual.

## 6. Experiment 2

In the next experiment, we examined the reverse inference: What do people infer from learning that a person has used strategies (vs willpower) to self-regulate impulses? In this experiment, participants read about two hypothetical persons, one who used willpower and one who used a strategy to regulate the same impulse. We expected that participants would rate those who use willpower to overcome temptations as higher in self-control relative to those who use self-control strategies. This  hypothesis,  the  data  collection  plan,  design,  and  analyses  were preregistered: https://aspredicted.org/zp8vn.pdf.

## 6.1. Method

After  reporting  demographic  information,  participants  were  presented with five different vignettes depicting a self-control conflict (e.g., ' G and E each have to complete a project for work but find themselves scrolling  through  social  media  instead  of  working  on  the  project. ' ). These five vignettes corresponded to five different types of strategies (situation modification, cognitive change, reward, punishment, and inhibition)  and  each  described  a  different  type  of  temptation  conflict (social media, gym attendance, junk food, alcohol, savings). They were then told about two hypothetical people, one who used willpower (e.g., ' G decides to use pure willpower to avoid social media. ' ) and one who used a self-control strategy (e.g., ' E decides to block all social media apps on their devices to avoid social media. ' ). Participants then rated each person in the scenario as high or low in self-control ( ' Do you think G/E is HIGH or LOW in self-control? ' ) on a 7-point scale (1 = Very low in self-control ,  7 = Very  high  in  self-control ).  Finally,  participants  also completed exploratory measures of potentially relevant traits (see online supplements for exploratory analyses: https://osf.io/9m84j).

## 6.2. Results and discussion

In  a  multilevel  regression  model  in  which  responses  were  nested within participants we examined self-control ratings across the five vignettes simultaneously while accounting for within-participant variance (preregistered). This analysis had 91.26% power to detect an effect size of b ¼ 0.2. This power analysis was based on a Monte Carlo simulation ( α = 0.05, nsim = 5000) using the simr package in R. The intra-class correlation  (ICC)  supported  the  use  of  a  multilevel  analysis  (ICC = 0.18), indicating that approximately 18% of the variance in self-control ratings  could  be  attributed  to  the  between-person level  and  approximately 82% of the variance existed at the within-person level. In the multilevel regression model, we regressed self-control ratings on strategy use (person used willpower, person used self-control strategy) while controlling vignette (social media, gym attendance, junk food, alcohol, savings). Strategy use significantly predicted self-control ratings, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.86, se = 0.06, 95% CI[ GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.98;-1.75], t (1786) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 30.64, p &lt; .001 . As expected,  participants  rated  persons  using  willpower  to  overcome temptation as higher in self-control ( M = 5.77, SD = 0.62) than persons using strategies ( M = 3.91, SD = 0.62). See online supplements for all coefficients by vignette: https://osf.io/9m84j.

In  sum,  participants  rated  targets  who  were  described  as  using strategies  when  faced  with  temptation  as  lower  in  self-control  than targets who use willpower. In this experiment both fictional persons the willpower user and strategy user - were presented together but rated on separate scales. That is, they are contrasted without being forced into opposite  ends  of  the  spectrum.  In  the  next  experiment,  we  examine whether the same effect occurs when participants read about only one person who is described as either using willpower or strategies (i.e., a between-subject design where the other option is not made explicit) or neither (i.e., a control condition).

## 7. Experiment 3

In this experiment we examined people ' s perception of a person after learning  this  person  has  used  willpower  or  strategies  to  counter tempting impulses in a between-subject design. We expected that both a person using strategies and a person using willpower would be rated as higher in self-control than a person who uses neither, but that someone using strategies to counter temptations would be seen as lower in selfcontrol than someone using only strength of will. This hypothesis, the data collection plan, design, and analyses were preregistered: https:// aspredicted.org/x87h6.pdf.

## 7.1. Method

After reporting demographic information, participants were randomly assigned to read about a person who experienced three selfcontrol dilemmas (eating healthy, focusing at work, saving for a trip) with no further information (control condition), with a description of successful  self-control  via  suppressing  temptations  and  exerting  pure willpower (willpower condition), or with a description of successful selfcontrol via strategies (strategies condition). For example, participants in the control condition read ' B has the goal to eat healthy, but on his way to work there is a cookie shop that he loves. ' Participants in the strategies condition read ' B has the goal to eat healthy, but on his way to work there is a cookie shop that he loves. Everyday he takes the long way home from work to avoid the store. ( … ) B uses self-control strategies to avoid giving in to temptation. ' . Participants in the willpower condition read ' B has the goal to eat healthy, but on his way to work there is a cookie shop that he loves. Everyday he suppresses the impulse to go into the store. ( … ) B uses strength of will to avoid giving in to temptation. ' . The vignettes were gender matched to the participant.

Participants were then asked to rate the hypothetical person ' B ' on a 13-item trait self-control scale (e.g., ' B is good at resisting temptation. ' ; adapted from Tangney et al., 2004) which were answered on scales from Not at all like B (1) to Very much like B (5) and were averaged into a perceived self-control scale ( α = 0.94). Finally, participants reported the frequency  with  which  they  themselves  experience  temptations,  use willpower, and use strategies on a scale from Never (1) to All the time (5).

## 7.2. Results and discussion

A  one-way  ANOVA  showed  a  significant  effect  of  condition, F (2, 264) = 83.09, p &lt; .001, η 2 = 0.39 (preregistered). This analysis had 80% power to detect an effect size of f = 0.19. Means are presented in Table 2.

Table 2 Person perception means across experiments.

|              |                                   | Control condition   | Control condition   | Person using willpower   | Person using willpower   | Person using strategies   | Person using strategies   |
|--------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|              |                                   | M                   | SD                  | M                        | SD                       | M                         | SD                        |
| Experiment 2 | Single item self-control judgment | -                   | -                   | 5.77 a                   | 0.62                     | 3.91 b                    | 0.62                      |
| Experiment 3 | Trait self- control               | 3.24 a              | 0.67                | 4.46 b                   | 0.57                     | 4.14 c                    | 0.73                      |
| Experiment 4 | Single item self-control judgment | 4.62 a              | 1.16                | 6.56 b                   | 0.69                     | 6.07 c                    | 1.09                      |
|              | Trait self- control               | 3.47 a              | 0.68                | 4.30 b                   | 0.51                     | 3.97 c                    | 0.67                      |
| Experiment 5 | Single item self-control judgment | -                   | -                   | 5.64 a                   | 1.26                     | 4.04 b                    | 1.44                      |

Note . Single item self-control judgment on a seven-point scale, trait self-control on a five-point scale. Experiment 2 aggregates across five vignettes. Experiment 5  aggregates  across  three  vignettes.  Means  significantly  different  from  each other within one row are marked by different subscripts.

Follow-up contrasts showed that participants rated a person as higher in self-control if they read about that person using strategies than if they read the control scenario, F (1,  264) = 81.95, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.237. Participants also rated a person as higher in self-control if they read about that person using willpower than if they read the control scenario, F (1, 264) = 157.46, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.374. Finally, participants rated the person using willpower as higher in self-control than the person using strategies, F (1, 264) = 10.57, p = .001, η 2 p = 0.038.

In exploratory (not preregistered) analyses we also examined participants ' own self-reported frequency of willpower and strategy use. Participants  reported  using  willpower  to  suppress  tempting  impulses more often ( M = 3.69, SD = 0.72) than strategies ( M = 3.55, SD = 0.81), t (266) = 3.16, p = .002, d = 0.19. Controlling for participants ' own selfcontrol behaviors did not reduce the significance of the condition effect: In an ANOVA where participants ' own willpower use and strategy use were entered as covariates, the condition continued to have a significant effect on perceived self-control of the hypothetical person, F (2, 262) = 81.92, p &lt; .001, and neither covariate significantly predicted perceived self-control (willpower use: F (1, 161) = 0.05, p = .816; strategy use: F (1, 262) = 0.32, p = .570).

In sum, both strategy and willpower use boosted the perception of the target as higher in self-control compared to a target described as encountering temptations without information on how these temptations were countered. However, people who were described as using strategies  when  faced  with  temptation  were  rated  as  lower  in  selfcontrol than people who were described as using willpower, suggesting that strategy use is relatively less central to people ' s lay beliefs about what constitutes self-control than willpower. In the next experiment we examine participants ' explicit endorsement of beliefs about strategy use.

## 8. Experiment 4

In  this  experiment  we  had  two  aims:  First,  we  designed  a  scale assessing the explicit endorsement of beliefs about strategies being more or  less  indicative  of  self-control,  testing  whether  scores  on  this  scale were meaningfully linked to inferences participants drew about persons described as using strategies or willpower. Second, we examined participants ' own intentions to use self-control strategies in the next week. We expected that those who endorse the belief that self-control strategies are less indicative of self-control would rate a hypothetical person using strategies as lower in self-control than a person using willpower and would be less likely to intend to use strategies themselves. These hypotheses,  the  data  collection  plan,  design,  and  analyses  were  preregistered: https://aspredicted.org/vu3s7.pdf

## 8.1. Method

Participants reported demographic information, and then completed the strategy beliefs scale and the person perception task described in Experiment  3,  in  counterbalanced  order.  We  tested  for  order  effects (preregistered),  but  order  of  the  measures  did  not  affect  any  of  the measures in this experiment, t s &lt; 0.1.27, p s &gt; 0.205, was not a significant  covariate  in  the  analyses  reported  below,  and  was  not  further considered.

The strategy beliefs scale included six items, three of which were statements about strategies indicating high self-control (e.g., ' If someone made a habit of using strategies, I would be confident in their ability to control themselves. ' ) and three about strategies indicating low self- control (e.g., ' A person who avoids temptations to make it easier on themselves is weak-willed. ' ) which were reverse coded. 1 The full scale is available  in  Appendix  A.  The  items  were  internally  coherent  (Cronbach ' s alpha = 0.83), and a principal component analysis showed that all items loaded on one factor (54.61% variance explained, Eigenvalue 3.28), with all item factor loadings &gt; 0.62. Items were averaged into an index of strategy beliefs. The distribution of this index was moderately negatively skewed, Skewness = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.65, se = 0.12, with the mode ( Mo = 4.00) being slightly above the mean of the distribution ( M = 3.96, SD = 0.70).

In  the  person  perception  task,  participants  read  about  a  gendermatched person (he, she, or them, respectively) who experienced selfcontrol  dilemmas  with  no  further  information  (control  condition), with a description of successful self-control via suppressing temptations (willpower condition), or with a description of successful self-control via strategies (strategies condition), as in Experiment 3. Participants then rated the hypothetical person ' B ' on a single item indicating low or high self-control on a 7-point Likert scale ( M = 5.77, SD = 1.29), and on a 13item trait self-control scale on a 5-point Likert scale ( M = 3.93, SD = 0.71).

Finally, all participants reported on their own intended strategy use in the next week. First, they rated the general frequency of intended strategy use ( ' How often will you use strategies in a typical day in the next week? ' never, rarely, sometimes, often, all the time, M = 3.13, SD = 0.94).  Second,  they  rated  the  likelihood  of  seven  different  types  of strategy  use  in  the  next  week  (e.g.,  situation  selection,  punishment, reward,  pre-commitment,  distraction,  cognitive  change,  and  acceptance; items adapted from Katzir, Baldwin, Werner, &amp; Hofmann, 2021, e.g., ' I will seek out situations in my life where I will not face temptation (e.g., by avoiding tempting situations) ' ) on scales ranging from Not at all likely I will do this (1) to Extremely likely I will do this (5). The seven items assessing  intended  specific  strategy  use  were  averaged  ( Cronbach ' s alpha = 0.75, M = 2.84, SD = 0.75). Participants also rated willpower use ( ' I will simply keep myself from acting on unwanted desires (e.g., I use willpower) ' ) on the same scale ( M = 3.32, SD = 1.14).

## 8.2. Results

## 8.2.1. Person perception

First, we examined whether the effect of condition found in Experiment  3  replicated  (not  preregistered).  A  one-way  ANOVA  showed  a significant  effect  of  condition  on  both  the  single  item  rating  of  selfcontrol, F (2, 440) = 152.21, p &lt; .001, η 2 = 0.41, and perceived trait self-control, F (2, 437) = 65.89, p &lt; .001, η 2 = 0.23. This analysis had 80% power to detect an effect size of f = 0.15. Means are presented in Table 2. Follow-up contrasts for the single item rating of self-control showed  that  participants  rated  a  person  as  higher  in  self-control  if they read about that person using willpower than if they read the control scenario, F (1, 440) = 285.05, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.393, and as higher in selfcontrol if they read about that person using strategies than if they read the control scenario, F (1, 440) = 154.29, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.260. Participants rated the person using strategies as lower in self-control than the person using willpower, F (1, 440) = 18.68, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.041. Followup contrasts for the trait scale of self-control showed the same pattern: participants rated a person as higher in trait self-control if they read about that person using willpower than if they read the control scenario, F (1, 437) = 130.68, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.230, and if they read about that person using strategies than if they read the control scenario, F (1, 437)

1 One  of  these  items  might  have  represented  strategies  as  inferior  trick method ' If someone has to trick themselves into keeping their goals, that would mean they lack self-control. ' ( reverse coded ). This item was based on Schelling ' s (1978)  definition  of  self-management  but  may  bias  responses.  We  also  conducted all analyses reported here with a shorter version of the scale without this item. All results replicated (see online supplements: https://osf.io/9m84j).

= 46.02, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.095.  Participants  rated  the  person  using strategies as lower in trait self-control than the person using willpower, F (1, 437) = 20.98, p &lt; .001, η 2 p = 0.046. Thus, findings replicated.

Next, we examined whether the difference between condition was moderated by the strategy beliefs scale (preregistered). In multiple regressions using PROCESS (Hayes, 2018, v3.2. Model 1, 5000 bootstrap samples, 95%CI), we entered the beliefs scale, condition ( GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1 = strategy condition,  0 = control  condition,  1 = willpower condition), and the effect coded interaction terms (Control vs Strategy conditions; Strategy vs Willpower conditions) as predictors, and the single item measure and the  trait  scale  assessing  perceived  self-control,  as  outcome  variables, respectively. These analyses had 80% power to detect an effect size of f 2 = 0.04. For the single self-control item, the beliefs scale main effect was significant, b = 0.52, se = 0.06, t (437) = 8.36, p &lt; .001, the Control vs Strategy main effect was significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.12, se = 0.06, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 18.11, p &lt; .001, the Strategy vs Willpower main effect was significant, b = 0.81, se = 0.06, t (437) = 13.49, p &lt; .001. The beliefs × Control vs Strategy interaction term was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.12, se = 0.09, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.28, p = .200,  and  the  beliefs × Strategy  vs  Willpower interaction was significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.22, se = 0.09, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 2.64, p = .009 (Fig. 1). Among people who believe that strategies are not indicative of self-control (1 SD below the mean on the beliefs scale), the person using willpower was perceived as higher in self-control than the person using strategies, b = 0.98, se = 0.09, t (437) = 11.46, p &lt; .001, and the person in the control condition was seen as lower in self-control than the person using strategies, b =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.04, se = 0.09, t (437) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 11.80, p &lt; .001. Among people who strongly  believe  that  strategies  are  indicative  of self-control (1 SD above the mean on the beliefs scale), the person in the control condition was still seen as lower in self-control than the person using strategies, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.20, se = 0.09, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 13.35, p &lt; .001, and the person using willpower was still perceived as higher in self-control than the person using strategies, b = 0.66, se = 0.09, t (437) = 7.75, p &lt; .001, but this difference was not as pronounced, as indicated by the significant interaction term and as shown in Fig. 1. Note that when only the contrast comparing strategy and willpower conditions was included in the interaction analysis, the beliefs × Strategy vs Willpower interaction term was also significant, b = 0.56, se = 0.13, t (296) = 4.48, p &lt; .001,  and  those  high  in  strategy  beliefs  perceived  the  person  using strategies as similarly high in self-control as the person using willpower, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.10, se = 0.13, t (296) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.78, p = .435.

For the trait self-control scale, the beliefs scale main effect was significant, b = 0.30, se = 0.04, t (434) = 7.47, p &lt; .001, the Control vs Strategy main effect was significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.44, se = 0.04, t (434) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 11.03, p &lt; .001, the Strategy vs Willpower main effect was significant, b = 0.39, se = 0.04, t (434) = 10.08, p &lt; .001. The beliefs × Control vs Strategy interaction term was marginally significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.11, se = 0.06, t (434) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.87, p = .063, and the beliefs × Strategy vs Willpower interaction was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.09, se = 0.05, t (434) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.60, p = .110  (Fig.  1).  Among  people  who  believe  that  strategies  are  not indicative of self-control (1 SD below the mean on the beliefs scale), the person in the control condition was seen as lower in self-control than the person using strategies, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.36, se = 0.06, t (434) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 6.38, p &lt; .001, and this difference was more pronounced among people who strongly believe  that  strategies  are  indicative  of  self-control  (1  SD  above  the mean on the beliefs scale), b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.51, se = 0.06, t (434) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 8.92, p &lt; .001.

Note that when only the strategy and willpower condition contrast was  included  in  the  interaction  analysis,  the  beliefs × Strategy  vs

Fig. 1. Perceived self-control of the fictional person by person condition and strategy beliefs scale.

<!-- image -->

Note. Ribbons represent 95% confidence intervals. Dashed vertical lines mark the values representing -1SD (left line), mean (middle line), and + 1SD (right line) on the strategy beliefs scale.

Willpower interaction term was significant, b =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.28, se = 0.09, t (295) = 3.31, p = .001, and those high in strategy beliefs did not perceive the person using strategies as significantly lower  in self-control than the person using willpower anymore, b =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.14, se = 0.09, t (295) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.56, p = .118.

## 8.2.2. Strategy use intention

First, we examined the correlations between beliefs and intentions (not  preregistered).  Participants  who  more  strongly  endorsed  beliefs about strategies being indicative of self-control intended to use strategies more frequently in the next week, r (440) = 0.34, p &lt; .001, and expected that it would be more likely that they would use the seven specific strategies, r (440) = 0.33, p &lt; .001, and less likely that they would simply suppress temptations/use willpower, r (440) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.10, p = .042.

In multiple regressions using PROCESS (Hayes, 2018, v3.2. Model 1, 5000 bootstrap samples, 95%CI), we entered the beliefs scale, condition ( GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1 = strategy condition, 0 = control condition, 1 = willpower condition),  and  their  interaction  term  as  predictors,  and  the  likelihood  of specific strategy use scale as outcome variable (preregistered). These analyses had 80% power to detect an effect size of f 2 = 0.04. The beliefs scale main effect was significant, b = 0.35, se = 0.05, t (437) = 7.19, p &lt; .001, the Control vs Strategy main effect was not significant, b =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.03, se = 0.05, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.58, p = .565, the Strategy vs Willpower main effect was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.01, se = 0.05, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.14, p = .888. The beliefs × Control vs Strategy interaction term was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.05, se = 0.07, t (437) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.71, p = .481, and the beliefs × Strategy vs Willpower interaction was not significant, b = 0.06 se = 0.07, t (437) = 0.96, p = .337. In other words, the more participants believed that  strategy  use  was  indicative  of  self-control,  the  more  likely  they judged it that they would use self-control strategies themselves in the next week, regardless of the person perception condition (Fig. 2).

The same analysis with the single item assessing general strategy use intentions as dependent variable (not preregistered) replicated results: The beliefs scale main effect was significant, b = 0.45, se = 0.06, t (436) = 7.42, p &lt; .001, the Control vs Strategy main effect was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.01, se = 0.06, t (436) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.17, p = .861, and the Strategy vs Willpower main effect was not significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.03, se = 0.06, t (436) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.55, p = .584. The beliefs × Control vs Strategy interaction term was not significant, b = 0.02, se = 0.09, t (436) = 0.18, p = .859, and the beliefs × Strategy  vs  Willpower  interaction  was  not  significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.01 se = 0.08, t (436) = 0.09, p = .930 (Fig. 2).

## 8.3. Discussion

We replicated earlier results showing that a target who used willpower was perceived as higher in self-control than a person who used strategies; both were rated as higher in self-control than a target in the control condition (who used neither). We also found that self-control judgments about fictitious people differ when accounting for participants ' explicit  beliefs  about  strategies.  Participants  who  strongly endorsed  the belief that strategies are indicative of self-control perceived people using strategies as higher in self-control relative to a control group in contrast to those who did not believe that strategies are indicative  of  self-control.  Those  who  believed  that  strategies  were indicative of self-control also reported a greater likelihood to use strategies themselves in the next week.

Fig. 2. Intentions to use strategies in the next week by person condition and strategy beliefs scale. Note. Ribbons represent 95% confidence intervals.

<!-- image -->

## 9. Experiment 5

In the final experiment we examine the causal effect of lay beliefs in strategies as indicative of self-control by experimentally manipulating lay beliefs. We expected that when the belief that strategies are indicative of self-control is salient, participants will be more willing to use strategies, and will rate a person using strategies as higher in self-control than when the belief that willpower is indicative of self-control is salient. These hypotheses, the data collection plan, design, and analyses were preregistered: https://aspredicted.org/gi8dk.pdf.

## 9.1. Pilot

In an initial pilot study, we randomly assigned participants to either read an article about the role of willpower in self-control ( '… Strength of will  makes the choice for goals and against temptations easier. With willpower we  resist temptations through inhibition and mental strength …' ) or an article about the role of strategies in self-control ( '… Many strategies can be used to set up our environment to make the choice  for  goals  and  against  temptations  easier.  Strategies  eliminate temptation or lead us to think of temptation in ways that make it less tempting …' ). Both articles were between 220 and 280 words long (see https://osf.io/7vgth/  for  full  survey).  After  reading  the  article  and providing a brief summary of the article (which also served as openended  attention  check),  participants  completed  the  same  six  item strategy  beliefs  scale  outlined  in  Experiment  4  ( Cronbach ' s  alpha = 0.72). Participants in the strategies condition scored non-significantly higher  on  this  scale  than  participants  in  the  willpower  condition, t (93) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1.50, p = .138, d = 0.31. This analysis had 80% power to detect an effect size of d = 0.37. Although the overall test was non-significant, the manipulation had a small effect ( d = 0.31) on shifting beliefs. We used this effect size to calculate the sample size necessary to detect an effect of this size in a more high-powered experiment (one-tailed), and recruited  a  sample  of  this  size  for  Experiment  5.  We  also  slightly amended the materials used (by including a visual that reinforced the message of the article) to strengthen our manipulation (see Appendix B for the exact articles participants read in Experiment 5).

## 9.2. Method

After  an  initial  demographic  survey,  participants  were  randomly assigned to the willpower condition or the strategies condition, using the manipulation  tested  in  the  pilot  experiment.  Participants  then  rated their  own intentions  to  use strategies  in  the  next  week  on  a  general frequency item ( ' How often will you use strategies in a typical day in the next week? ' ) and on a more detailed scale that assessed seven different categories of strategies ( ' I will commit myself in advance to goals I want to  achieve  (e.g.,  by  committing  to  deadlines,  by  telling  other  people about it) ' ) as well as one item on willpower use ( ' I will simply keep myself from acting on unwanted desires (e.g., I use willpower) ' ), as in Experiment  4.  Likelihood  judgments  for  the  seven  strategies  were aggregated (Cronbach ' s alpha = 0.70). We also assessed shifts in person perception for people who were described as using strategies or willpower to control temptation, using three of the vignettes (social media, gym attendance, saving), and the single self-control item rating used in Experiment 2.

## 9.3. Results

An independent t -test (preregistered) showed that participants in the strategies condition reported intentions to use strategies in general more frequently ( M = 3.37, SD = 0.83) than participants in the willpower condition ( M = 3.17, SD = 0.84), t (269) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 2.03, one-tailed p = .022, d = 0.25. However, participants in the strategies condition did not report a higher likelihood of using the seven specific strategies ( M = 2.80, SD = 0.65) than participants in the willpower condition ( M = 2.79, SD =

0.66), t (268) =GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.70, one-tailed p = .472, d = 0.01. This analysis (onetailed)  had  80%  power  to  detect  an  effect  size  of d = 0.30.  In  an exploratory  analysis  (preregistered),  we  also  examined  participants ' intentions to use willpower. An independent t-test showed that participants in the willpower condition reported intentions to use willpower to overcome  temptation  more  frequently  ( M = 3.21, SD = 1.17)  than participants in the strategies condition ( M = 2.91, SD = 1.20), t (268) = 2.09, two-tailed p = .037, d = 0.25.

Next, we examined whether the beliefs manipulation affected person perception. In a multilevel regression model in which responses were nested within participants we examined self-control ratings across the three vignettes simultaneously while accounting for within-participant variance  (preregistered).  The  intra-class  correlation  (ICC)  supported the use of a multilevel analysis (ICC = 0.06), indicating that approximately 6% of the variance in self-control ratings could be attributed to the between-person level and approximately 94% of the variance existed at  the  within-person  level.  In  the  multilevel  regression  model,  we regressed self-control ratings on condition (0 = willpower, 1 = strategies),  strategy  use  (person  used  willpower,  person  used  self-control strategy), and their interaction term. As expected, the interaction between  condition  and  strategy  use  significantly  predicted  self-control ratings, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.61, se = 0.12, 95% CI  [ GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.85; GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.36], t (1352) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 4.93, p &lt; .001  (Fig.  3).  In  the  willpower  condition,  participants perceived the person using willpower as having more self-control ( M = 5.84, SE = 0.08) than the person using strategies ( M = 3.94, SE = 0.08), b = 1.90 ,  se = 0.09, 95% CI [1.73; 2.07], p &lt; .001. In the strategies condition,  this  difference  was  attenuated  although  participants  still perceived the person using willpower as having more self-control ( M = 5.42, SE = 0.08) than the person using strategies ( M = 4.13, SE = 0.08), b = 1.30 , se = 0.09, 95% CI [1.12; 1.47], p &lt; .001.

In an additional multilevel regressions we also controlled for vignette (social media, gym, savings), the interaction remained significant, b = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.61, se = 0.12, 95% CI [ GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.84; GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 0.37], t (1353) = GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 4.95, p &lt; .001.

## 9.4. Discussion

In this experiment, participants who read about strategy use being

Fig. 3. Perceived self-control of the fictional person by strategy use and beliefs condition.

<!-- image -->

Note. Error  bars  represent  95%  confidence  intervals.  Black  circles  represent mean ratings of perceived self-control.

indicative of self-control intended to use strategies significantly more often in the next week than participants who read about willpower being indicative of self-control. This effect did not extend to the intended use of specific strategies but did extend to being less willing to simply suppress  temptation  via  willpower.  One  possible  reason  for  the  lack  of change in people ' s willingness to use specific strategies might be that people tend to use strategies that 'fit ' with their personality and situation (Peetz &amp; Davydenko, 2021) and the seven specific strategies we asked participants to rate might not have fit equally well for all participants. Thus, participants who believe that strategy use is indicative of selfcontrol might be more willing to use strategies in the abstract sense but  which  exact  strategies  they  are  willing  to  use  depends  on  their personal preference.

Furthermore, while participants again perceived hypothetical others as higher in self-control if they were described as using pure willpower to  counter  temptation  than  if  they  were  described  as  using  specific strategies to reduce temptation, this perception was attenuated in the condition describing strategies as indicative of self-control. While this experimental  manipulation  of  strategy  beliefs  suggests  that  people ' s beliefs can be shifted in a meaningful way, the manipulation might have introduced demand characteristics to provide responses that align with the information provided in the article. Thus, judgments about other people described as using strategies might capture participants ' desire to give  the  'correct ' answer according to  study  materials  rather  than  a deeper shift in beliefs. In other words, possible demand characteristics of the  manipulation  limit  the  conclusions  that  can  be  drawn  from  the experiment.

## 10. General discussion

There are many ways to resist temptations and make goal-oriented decisions.  Our  experiments  show  that  the  way  people  control  their temptations  has  implications  for  how  they  are  perceived  by  others. While both those who use self-control strategies to reduce temptations and those who use pure willpower to suppress temptation were seen as high in self-control, fictional people described as using strategies were seen as relatively lower in self-control (Experiments 2 -5). This difference was reduced for those participants who scored high on a scale of strategy  beliefs  (i.e.,  a  scale  assessing  beliefs  about  strategies  being indicative of self-control, Experiment 4) and was reduced for those who were assigned to read an article about strategies being an important facet of self-control (Experiment 5). In addition, strategies beliefs were linked to more intentions to use strategies oneself (Experiments 4 -5). In sum, lay beliefs appear to link the act of using self-control strategies to self-control to a lesser degree than the act of suppressing impulses with willpower, suggesting that willpower is more central to people ' s idea of self-control  than  self-control  strategies.  Given  recent  findings  that strategy use is more common among people high in self-control (e.g., Leduc-Cummings et al., 2022) and is a more sustainable way to pursue goals over time (e.g., Milyavskaya &amp; Inzlicht, 2017), these lay beliefs do not correspond well with the empirical knowledge to date.

## 10.1. Contributions

Researchers ' understanding of the processes underlying what makes people  good  at  self-control  has  evolved  over  time  from  focusing  on willpower to focusing on other aspects, such as self-control strategies. However, what has until now received little attention is what laypeople think about the use of strategies for self-control. Past research has shown that laypeople consider internal strategies as more central to self-control than external strategies (Bermúdez et al., 2021) and immediate temptation control strategies as more central to self-control than plans for future  temptation  control  (Irving  et  al.,  2022).  The  present  research focuses on general assumptions about self-control strategies rather than a contrast between individual strategies. This research contributes to the literature on lay theories about self-control by showing that while both self-control strategies and willpower use are seen as indicative of selfcontrol,  there  are  meaningful  variations  between  people  and  across time in the degree to which strategy use is seen as indicative of selfcontrol.

Our  research  might  also  contribute  to  the  more  general  field  of behavior modification programs (Griffiths et al., 2009; Gulliver et al., 2010). People like to think of themselves in favourable ways (Heine, Lehman, Markus, &amp; Kitayama, 1999), including maintaining a positive view of their self-control. Therefore, interventions focused on improving self-control might benefit from also targeting lay beliefs about strategy use in addition to teaching the content of strategies. For example, interventions might not only address the effectiveness of specific strategies but also link the use of strategies to desirable personality traits or person descriptors. Research on the effectiveness of financial self-control strategies has shown that teaching participants specific strategies was not as effective  for  their  actual  spending  as  leaving  it  up  to  participants  to choose their own strategies (Peetz &amp; Davydenko, 2021). This suggests that people need to be convinced to use strategies -lay beliefs about what strategy use says about themselves as a person might be one of the ways that can convince people to implement advised courses of action.

## 10.2. Limitations

All  our  experiments  examining  inferences  about  people  examine these in the context of fictional vignettes. Results might not generalize to person perception about real people that are observed in more than one context. For instance, closeness among targets and observers is associated with greater trait judgment accuracy (Funder &amp; Colvin, 1988), in part because close others have more access to trait-relevant information (Funder, 2012). In other words, learning that someone uses a strategy might be only a small part of everyday trait self-control judgments.

The vignettes were necessarily contextually abstract. In online supplements we provide additional information on self-control judgments as a function of the specific vignettes (Experiment 2 and 5), showing that not  only  the  use  of  strategies  versus  willpower,  but  also  the  type  of temptation and type of strategy might influence judgments of trait selfcontrol. Note, however, that results were similar across the different vignettes suggesting an underlying emphasis of willpower over strategies as a self-control indicator across different contexts.

Both the scale assessing lay strategy beliefs (Experiment 4) and the article manipulating strategy beliefs (Experiment 5) might have introduced  demand  characteristics,  nudging  participants  to  provide  responses that they believe align with the experiment materials rather than those reflecting their true beliefs. To reduce demand characteristics for the scale, half the items were reverse coded, to reflect both possible viewpoints. To reduce demand characteristics introduced by the article, we instructed participants that ' There are no right or wrong answers, we are interested in your opinion ' . However, it cannot be ruled out that demand characteristics might have played a role in the effect between conditions. Future research might consider extending the time between the lay beliefs ' manipulation and subsequent questions to reduce any potential carryover effects, or to manipulate lay beliefs indirectly rather than via explicitly given information.

## 10.3. Future directions

In  several  of  the  experiments  we  use  the  term ' self-control ' in participant-facing materials (we avoided this term in Experiment 1 and 3, instead using the terms and phrases of a trait self-control scale to describe the concept). As with any examination of lay beliefs, the choice of label might have influenced participants ' judgments. For example, a lay understanding of the term self-control might see it as synonymous with willpower. Future research should test whether the present findings replicate when using terms that are less likely to be seen as synonymous with willpower such as ' goal attainment ' or by avoiding any explicit references to the concept.

Relatedly, the concept of willpower might be conflated with effort. Past research has shown that people make more positive trait judgments toward others when effort is explicitly emphasized (Kristal &amp; Zlatev, 2021). It is possible that by highlighting targets as using ' pure willpower ' when contrasted with strategies contributed to a more positive assessment  of  self-control  because  effort  was  emphasized.  Future research should consider assessing and controlling for perceptions of effort to better understand whether the valuation of effort contributes to variations in self-control judgments.

The  present  experiments  focused  on  contrasting  use  of  strategies with willpower. This approach contrasts with others that have compared different types of self-control strategies (Bermúdez et al., 2021; Irving et al., 2022). Future research might further distinguish different stages of strategy use (e.g., process model; Duckworth et al., 2016) to examine whether strategy type influences judgments of self-control. For example, situational strategies addressing possible temptations in advance tend to be  more  effective  (Duckworth  et  al.,  2016)  than  reactive  strategies employed when already facing the temptation. Do people distinguish between these types of strategies in their attributions of self-control? Setting up a situational context that limits the likelihood to give in to temptation  might  require  more  foresight  whereas  reactive  strategies might require more mental effort. Distinguishing lay beliefs about specific strategy use might also help explain some of the null effects we found in Experiment 5, where the manipulated beliefs about strategies affected only general willingness to use strategies but not willingness to use specific strategies.

In addition, future research may also consider examining the role of strategy success on self-control judgments -would participants be rated as high in self-control if they used willpower but did not successfully refrain from temptation, or indulged only partially? For example, would someone who is offered a bag of chips and uses willpower to eat only two, be considered as high or low on self-control (compared to another person who eats none, or who eats many chips)? Another question to consider  is  whether  both  personal  experience  and  strategy  success impact the development of strategy beliefs. For example, would those who  use  willpower  themselves  be  more  likely  to  believe  that  it  is indicative of good self-control?

## 10.4. Generalizability of conclusions

Participants in these experiments were recruited from North American populations. Lay beliefs about willpower, self-control, and strategies likely have cultural connotations (Han, Lee, Ohtsubo, &amp; Masuda, 2022; Li, Li, Vazsonyi, &amp; Dou, 2018; Savani &amp; Job, 2017; Yanaoka et al., 2022) and might not generalize to participants from other cultures. For example, in cultures where self-discipline is especially valued (e.g., tight vs. loose cultures; Gelfand et al., 2011; Harrington &amp; Gelfand, 2014) people might show even stronger preference for suppression of temptation rather than managing temptation in their concept of self-control.

## Appendix A. Strategy beliefs scale

A self-control conflict is a conflict that arises when you face a temptation/desire (e.g., your favorite dessert, sales in your favorite store, etc.) when in pursuit of a long-term goal (e.g., maintaining health, saving money, etc.).

Sometimes people use pure willpower to suppress these temptations.

Sometimes people use strategies - little tricks people play on themselves to make them do the things they ought to do or to keep us from the things they ought to avoid. For example, they may put their favorite candy out of reach for the moment of temptation, they may promise themselves small rewards for following their meal plan, they may surrender authority to a trustworthy friend who will police their calories.

How do you feel about people using strategies to pursue their goals?

1.  A person has inadequate self-control if they have to use strategies to achieve their goals. ( reverse coded )
2.  I would be impressed with a person ' s self-discipline if they used strategies.
3.  A person who avoids temptations to make it easier on themselves is weak-willed. ( reverse coded )
4.  Using strategies to make goal pursuit easier would mean a person has strong self-control.

Participants in these experiments were from online crowdsourcing websites. We took many precautions to ensure good data quality and participants showed good engagement with the experiments as evident in the lengthy written responses and high scale reliabilities. However, crowdsourced samples might differ from the general population in the following way: they are often younger, more educated, and predominantly  White  (see  Goodman &amp; Paolacci,  2017  for  a  review).  Results might also not generalize to specific populations such as children (but see Haimovitz, Dweck, &amp; Walton, 2019, for beneficial framing effects of willpower  in  preschool-aged  children).  Future  studies  examining  the potentially different lay beliefs about self-control across diverse populations  would  contribute  to  an  understanding  how  lay  beliefs  may develop over the lifespan or shift depending on cultural influences.

## 11. Conclusion

Our research underlines the importance of understanding the beliefs people hold about the use of self-control strategies. When it comes to self-regulation, ' many roads lead to Rome ' (Hennecke &amp; Bürgler, 2020), but  which  road  is  taken  appears  to  matter  for  how  the  traveller  is perceived by others. Our experiments show that there are individual differences in lay beliefs about the use of strategies that are both predictive of one ' s own behavioral intentions and malleable. Finding ways to promote strategy lay beliefs in a way that increases people ' s  willingness to recognize the many roads they can take to achieve their goals might increase the chances that they find a path particularly suitable to them.

## Open science practices

All  materials,  data,  and  SPSS  syntax  files  for  all  experiments  are available for download (https://osf.io/6ezsk/).

## Author note

This research was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) grants awarded to J.P. (#109652) and M.M. (#311314).

## Conflict of Interest

None.

## Data availability

Full materials, data and syntax for all experiments are available on OSF: https://osf.io/6ezsk/.

5.  If someone has to trick themselves into keeping their goals that would mean that they lack self-control. ( reverse coded )
6.  If someone made a habit of using strategies, I would be confident in their ability to control themselves.

Appendix B. Articles used to manipulate lay beliefs in Experiment 5

<!-- image -->

## Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2023.104457.

## References

Baumeister, R. F., &amp; Heatherton, T. F. (1996). Self-regulation failure: An overview. Psychological Inquiry, 7 (1), 1 -15.

- Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., &amp; Tice, D. M. (2007). The strength model of self-control. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16 (6), 351 -355.
- Bermúdez, J. P., Murray, S., Chartrand, L., &amp; Barbosa, S. (2021). What ' s inside is all that counts? The contours of everyday thinking about self-control. Review of Philosophy and Psychology . https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-021-00573-2
- Burnette, J. L., &amp; Finkel, E. J. (2012). Buffering against weight gain following dieting setbacks: An implicit theory intervention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48 (3), 721 -725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.12.020
- Duckworth, A. L., Gendler, T. S., &amp; Gross, J. J. (2014). Self-control in school-age children. Educational Psychologist, 49 (3), 199 -217. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 00461520.2014.926225
- Duckworth, A. L., Milkman, K. L., &amp; Laibson, D. (2018). Beyond willpower: Strategies for reducing failures of self-control. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 19 (3), 102 -129. https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100618821893
- Duckworth, A. L., Taxer, J. L., Eskreis-Winkler, L., Galla, B. M., &amp; Gross, J. J. (2019). Selfcontrol and academic achievement. Annual Review of Psychology, 70 (1), 373 -399. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-103230

Duckworth, A. L., White, R. E., Matteucci, A. J., Shearer, A., &amp; Gross, J. J. (2016). A stitch in time: Strategic self-control in high school and college students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108 (3), 329 -341. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000062 273. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-

- Dweck, C. S., &amp; Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95 (2), 256 -295X.95.2.256

Ent, M. R., Baumeister, R. F., &amp; Tice, D. M. (2015). Trait self-control and the avoidance of temptation. Personality and Individual Differences, 74 , 12 -15. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.paid.2014.09.031

Francis, Z., &amp; Job, V. (2018). Lay theories of willpower. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 12 (4), Article e12381. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12381

- Fujita, K., Orvell, A., &amp; Kross, E. (2020). Smarter, not harder: A toolbox approach to enhancing self-control. Policy Insights From the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 7 (2), 149 -156. https://doi.org/10.1177/2372732220941242

Funder, D. C. (2012). Accurate personality judgement. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21 (3), 177 -182. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412445309

- Funder, D. C., &amp; Colvin, C. R. (1988). Friends and strangers: Acquaintanceship, agreement, and the accuracy of personality judgement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 (1), 149 -158. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.55.1.149
- Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J. L., Nishii, L., Leslie, L. M., Lun, J., Lim, B. C., … Yamaguchi, S. (2011). Differences between tight and loose cultures: A 33-nation study. Science, 332 (6033), 1100 -1104. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1197754

- Gillebaart, M., &amp; de Ridder, D. T. D. (2015). Effortless self-control: A novel perspective on response conflict strategies in trait self-control. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 9 (2), 88 -99. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12160
- Goodman, J. K., &amp; Paolacci, G. (2017). Crowdsourcing consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research, 44 (1), 196 -210. https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucx047
- Griffiths, M. D., Wood, R. T. A., &amp; Parke, J. (2009). Social responsibility tools in online gambling: A survey of attitudes and behavior among internet gamblers. Cyberpsychology &amp; Behavior, 12 (4), 413 -421. https://doi.org/10.1089/ cpb.2009.0062
- Gross, J. J. (2015). Emotion regulation: Current status and future prospects. Psychological Inquiry, 26 (1), 1 -26. https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2014.940781
- Gulliver, A., Griffiths, K. M., &amp; Christensen, H. (2010). Perceived barriers and facilitators to mental health help-seeking in young people: A systematic review. BMC Psychiatry, 10 . https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-244X-10-113. Article 113.
- Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C. S., &amp; Walton, G. M. (2019). Preschoolers find ways to resist temptation after learning that willpower can be energizing. Developmental Science, 23 (3), 1 -10. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12905
- Han, J. Y., Lee, H., Ohtsubo, Y., &amp; Masuda, T. (2022). Culture and stress coping: Cultural variations in the endorsement of primary and secondary control coping for daily stress across European Canadians, East Asian Canadians, and the Japanese. Japanese Psychological Research, 64 (2), 141 -155. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpr.12406
- Harrington, J. R., &amp; Gelfand, M. J. (2014). Tightness-looseness across the 50 United States. PNAS Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111 (22), 7990 -7995. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1317937111
- Hayes, A. F. (2018). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression-based approach (2nd ed). The Guilford Press.
- Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., &amp; Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106 (4), 766 -794.
- Hennecke, M., &amp; Bürgler, S. (2020). Many roads lead to Rome: Self-regulatory strategies and their effects on self-control. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 14 (6), 1 -16. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12530
- Hennecke, M., Czikmantori, T., &amp; Brandst ¨ atter, V. (2019). Doing despite disliking: Self -regulatory strategies in everyday aversive activities. European Journal of Personality, 33 (1), 104 -128. https://doi.org/10.1002/per.2182
- Hofmann, W., Friese, M., &amp; Strack, F. (2009). Impulse and self-control from a dualsystems perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4 (2), 162 -176. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01116.x
- Inzlicht, M., Werner, K. M., Briskin, J. L., &amp; Roberts, B. W. (2021). Integrating models of self-regulation. Annual Review of Psychology, 72 , 319 -345. https://doi.org/10.1146/ annurev-psych-061020-105721
- Irving, Z. C., Bridges, J., Glasser, A., Bermúdez, J. P., &amp; Sripada, C. (2022). Will-powered: Synchronic regulation is the difference maker for self-control. Cognition, 225 , Article 105154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2022.105154
- Job, V., Dweck, C. S., &amp; Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego depletion -Is it all in your head?: Implicit theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21 (11), 1686 -1693. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610384745
- Katzir, M., Baldwin, M., Werner, K. M., &amp; Hofmann, W. (2021). Moving beyond inhibition: Capturing a broader scope of the self-control construct with the self control strategy scale (SCSS). Journal of Personality Assessment, 103 (6), 762 -776. https://doi.org/10.1080/00223891.2021.1883627
- Kristal, A. S., &amp; Zlatev, J. J. (2021, November). Going beyond the 'self ' in self-control: Interpersonal consequences of commitment strategy use (Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 22-033). https://www.hbs.edu/ris/Publication%20File s/22-033\_62b5f2ec-c5f8-4522-8d34-bf483e475eca.pdf.
- Leduc-Cummings, I., Werner, K. M., Milyavskaya, M., Dominick, J. K., &amp; Cole, S. (2022). Experiencing obstacles during goal pursuit: The role of goal motivation and trait selfcontrol. Journal of Research in Personality, 99 , Article 104231. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jrp.2022.104231
- Leonard, T. C., Thaler, R. H., &amp; Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. Constitutional Political Economy, 19 , 356 -360. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10602-008-9056-2
- Li, J.-B., Vazsonyi, A., &amp; Dou, K. (2018). Is individualism-collectivism associated with self-control? Evidence from Chinese and U.S. samples. PLoS One, 13 (12), Article e0208541. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0208541
- Milyavskaya, M., &amp; Inzlicht, M. (2017). What ' s so great about self-control? Examining the importance of effortful self-control and temptation in predicting real-life depletion and goal attainment. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 8 (6), 603 -611. https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550616679237
- Milyavskaya, M., &amp; Nadolny, D. (2018). Health goals among American adults: Prevalence, characteristics, and barriers. Journal of Health Psychology, 23 (10), 1350 -1355. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105316656227
- Milyavskaya, M., Saunders, B., &amp; Inzlicht, M. (2021). Self-control in daily life: Prevalence and effectiveness of diverse self-control strategies. Journal of Personality, 89 (4), 634 -651. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12604
- Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., &amp; Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244 (4907), 933 -938.
- Mueller, C. M., &amp; Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children ' s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75 (1), 33 -52. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.33
- Peetz, J., &amp; Davydenko, M. (2021). Financial self-control strategy use: Generating personal strategies reduces spending more than learning expert strategies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 97 , Article 104189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jesp.2021.104189
- Peetz, J., &amp; Kammrath, L. (2011). Only because I love you: Why people make and why they break promises in romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100 (5), 887 -904. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021857
- de Ridder, D. T. D., Lensvelt-Mulders, G., Finkenauer, C., Stok, F. M., &amp; Baumeister, R. F. (2012). Taking stock of self-control: A meta-analysis of how trait self-control relates to a wide range of behaviors. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16 (1), 76 -99. https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868311418749
- Righetti, F., &amp; Finkenauer, C. (2011). If you are able to control yourself, I will trust you: The role of perceived self-control in interpersonal trust. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100 (5), 874 -886. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021827
- R ¨ oseler, L., Ebert, J., Schütz, A., &amp; Baumeister, R. F. (2021). The upsides and downsides of high self-control: Evidence for effects of similarity and situation dependency. Europe ' s Journal of Psychology, 17 (1), 1 -16. https://doi.org/10.5964/ejop.2639
- Savani, J., &amp; Job, V. (2017). Reverse ego-depletion: Acts of self-control can improve subsequent performance in Indian cultural contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113 (4), 589 -607. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000099
- Schelling, T. C. (1978). Egonomics, or the art of self-management. The American Economic Review, 68 (2), 290 -294. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1816707.
- Shea, C. T., Davisson, E. K., &amp; Fitzsimons, G. M. (2013). Riding other people ' s coattails: Individuals with low self-control value self-control in other people. Psychological Science, 24 (6), 1031 -1036. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612464890
- Smith, A. L., Carter, S. M., Chapman, S., Dunlop, S. M., &amp; Freeman, B. (2015). Why do smokers try to quit without medication or counselling? A qualitative study with exsmokers. BMJ Open, 5 (4), e007301. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-007301
- Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., &amp; Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control predicts good adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality, 72 (2), 271 -322.
- Werner, K. M., Sjåstad, H., Milyavskaya, M., &amp; Hofmann, W. (2020). Planning for success: Trait self-control predicts goal attainment through the use of implementation intentions. PsyArXiv https://psyarxiv.com/m9u4e/.
- Yanaoka, K., Michaelson, L. E., Guild, R. M., Dostart, G., Yonehiro, J., Saito, S., &amp; Munkata, Y. (2022). Cultures crossing: The power of habit in delaying gratification. Psychological Science, 33 (7), 1172 -1181. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 09567976221074650