## Predictors of Stability of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Subtypes From Childhood to Young Adulthood

RICHARD D. TODD, M.D., PH.D., HONGYAN HUANG, PH.D., ALEXANDRE A. TODOROV, PH.D., ROSALIND J. NEUMAN, PH.D., ANGELA M. REIERSEN, M.D., M.P.E., CYNTHIA A. HENDERSON, PH.D., AND WENDY C. REICH, PH.D.

## ABSTRACT

Objective: To determine the 5-year prospective stability of population-based and DSM-IV subtypes of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as well as to explore predictors of stability. Method: A total of 708 twins ages 7 to 19 years who were identified from birth records of the state of Missouri and had participated in a study of ADHD were reassessed 5 years later in a blinded fashion. Stabilities of DSM-IV and population-based ADHD subtypes were compared using percentage of agreement with significance tested by the 0 statistic. Predictors of stability of subtype diagnosis were determined using multivariate logistic regression. Results: In general, 5-year ADHD subtype stability was poor to modest and ranged from 11.1% to 24.0% for DSM-IV for subtypes and from 14.3% to 35.3% for clinically significant populationderived subtypes. There were no predictors of diagnostic stability that applied across subtypes. There were subtypespecific predictors including a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder for DSM-IV primarily inattentive ADHD; lower verbal IQ for DSM-IV combined type ADHD; and younger age, oppositional defiant disorder, and medication use for population-defined severe combined ADHD. Conclusions: Population-defined ADHD subtype criteria demonstrated modestly improved diagnostic stability over 5 years compared to DSM-IV subtypes. Few correlates or predictors of stability were identified. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry , 2008;47(1):76 Y 85. Key Words: attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, development, twin study.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common and heritable psychiatric disorders that arises during childhood and is characterized by significant problems with educational, social, and family functioning. 1 A variety of twin, family, and adoption studies have demonstrated the high heritability of

Accepted July 27, 2007 under the Editorship of Mina K. Dulcan, M.D.

Drs. Todd, Huang, Todorov, Neuman, Reiersen, Henderson, and Reich are with the Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine; Dr. Todd is also with the Department of Genetics.

This work was supported by NIH R01-MH52813 (Todd). We acknowledge the participation of the twin families, the interviewer staff, and the Missouri Department of Vital Statistics.

Correspondence to Dr. Richard D. Todd, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8134; 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110; e-mail: toddr@wustl.edu.

0890-8567/07/4701-0076 /C211 2007 by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.

DOI: 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815a6aca

ADHD when considered to be a categorical diagnosis by several diagnostic nomenclatures (e.g., DSM-III , DSM-III-R , DSM-IV , or ICD-10 ) or as continuum of problems with respect to inattention and hyperactive/ impulsive problems as reviewed in Faraone et al. 2

Interestingly, ADHD also appears to be a developmentally unstable diagnosis that by some accounts essentially disappears in adulthood. 3 In a recent metaanalysis of preDSM-IV prospective follow-up studies of ADHD, Faraone and colleagues 4 found that individuals only met full diagnostic criteria ( DSM-II , DSM-III , DSM-III-R , and, for a few studies, DSM-IV criteria) about 15% of the time at age 25. Studies that included a second informant (in addition to adult selfreport) found higher rates of stability. When criteria were relaxed to be a proxy of the DSM-IV definition of ADHD in partial remission, the rate of affected individuals was about 65% by age 25. More recently,

J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 47:1, JANUARY 2008

the stability of DSM-IV subtypes from preschool through elementary school has been examined by Lahey and colleagues. 5 Using a repeated-measures prospective study design, these investigators found that 31% of combined subtype ADHD children and 50% of predominantly inattentive subtype ADHD children switched subtypes, whereas most children with predominantly hyperactive/impulsive subtype ADHD either switched to combined subtype or unaffected status on follow-up. Despite this poor subtype stability for various definitions of ADHD, prospective twin studies demonstrate significant subtype-specific genetic influences using DSM-IV criteria from childhood to adolescence 6 or, using continuous symptom measures of overactivity and attention, problems from preschool to school age. 7

The nature of this lack of diagnostic stability is puzzling given the high heritability and increasing comorbidity associated with ADHD with increasing age, for example, as in Biederman et al. 8 In addition to problems of developmentally appropriate diagnostic criteria, others have outlined possible confounds to follow-up studies including ascertainment procedures, the lack of the use of standardized diagnostic assessments, lack of blind reassessments, changing of informants from parent or teachers to self as children become adults, and changing diagnostic criteria. 9 More recently, the introduction of long-acting stimulant medications makes assessments by teachers and employers problematic as they may be unaware of what the individual is like off medications. Another issue is that the diagnostic criteria as codified in DSM and ICD have been extracted primarily from clinical studies of referred patients and families, which may introduce unknown biases into the diagnostic formulations. This has led some investigators to use populationbased sampling approaches to develop diagnostic criteria.

We have used birth records Y based sampling of twins in the state of Missouri and general population-based twin registries in Australia to identify naturally occurring clusters of the 18 DSM-IV ADHD symptoms. The goal was to develop phenotypically more homogeneous syndrome definitions that may be more heritable and stable. In a series of previous studies, we primarily used latent class analysis (a form of nonparametric cluster analysis) 10 to derive naturally occurring clusters of ADHD symptoms in samples of birth record Y identified female twins, 11 mixed-sex twins, 12,13 and general population Y based twin registry samples of mixed twins and nontwin siblings. 14,15 We have identified similar phenotypically distinct ADHD subtypes in all three samples, three of which appeared to be clinically relevant based on impairment in school, home, and other functioning. 13,16 These populationbased subtypes appear to be family specific as judged by monozygotic and dizygotic concordance rates, suggesting that there is genetic heterogeneity in subtype development. 11,13,15 This suggestion has been supported by the finding of specific candidate gene associations with the severe inattentive 17 and the severe combined population-based subtypes 18 as well as by the presence of subtype specific gene x gene and gene x environment interactions with prenatal exposure to smoking. 19 These population-based ADHD types only partially overlap with the DSM-IV conceptualizations, with the largest overlap being with the DSM-IV combined type ADHD and the severe combined problems latent class. 11,14 For the DSM-IV combined type ADHD, essentially all of the cases fall into the severe combined population-based ADHD subtype. In addition, about 20% of DSM-IV predominantly inattentive ADHD cases fall into this class and about 20% of the class is composed of individuals who do not have a formal DSM-IV ADHD diagnosis. For the severe attentive problems population-based ADHD subtype, about 60% of DSM-IV predominantly inattentive cases occur in this subtype along with many individuals who would not receive a DSM-IV ADHD diagnosis. 11 For the DSM-IV predominantly hyperactive/impulsive subtype, about 50% of these cases fall into the hyperactive/impulsive populationbased subtype, whereas the remainder of this class includes a small percentage of individuals with predominantly inattentive or combined type ADHD or individuals who received no DSM-IV diagnoses. In terms of symptom counts, the severe combined population-based ADHD subtype has more than seven inattentive and seven hyperactive/impulsive symptoms on average, and the severe attention problems population-defined ADHD class has more than six inattentive symptoms and two or fewer hyperactive/impulsive symptoms. The severe hyperactive/impulsive population-defined ADHD class has four or more hyperactive/impulsive symptoms but fewer than two inattentive symptoms.

TABLE 1 Total and Follow-up Sample Characteristics

|                  | n     | Mean Age, y   | Median Age, y   | Range, y   | Follow-up Interval, y   | African American, %   | Mean Socioeconomic Status a   | Stimulant Medication, %   |
|------------------|-------|---------------|-----------------|------------|-------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Total sample     |       |               |                 |            |                         |                       |                               |                           |
| Total            | 1,630 | 13.0 T 3.2    | 13              | 7 Y 19     | V                       | 14.6                  | $34,227.60                    | 19.5                      |
| Male             | 1,018 | 13.2 T 3.3    | 13              | 7 Y 19     | V                       | 13.7                  | $34,485.10                    | 25.8                      |
| Female           | 612   | 12.7 T 3.2    | 12              | 7 Y 19     | V                       | 16.2                  | $33,800.10                    | 8.8                       |
| Follow-up sample |       |               |                 |            |                         |                       |                               |                           |
| Total            | 708   | 12.8 T 3.3    | 12              | 7 Y 19     | V                       | 11.2 b                | $35,237.80 b                  | 22.3                      |
| Male             | 425   | 13.1 T 3.3    | 13              | 7 Y 19     | V                       | 9.9 b                 | $35,272.70                    | 30.1                      |
| Female           | 283   | 12.5 T 3.2    | 12              | 7 Y 18     | V                       | 13.1                  | $35,185.80 b                  | 10.6                      |
| Time 2           |       |               |                 |            |                         |                       |                               |                           |
| Total            | 708   | 18.1 T 3.4    | 18              | 12 Y 25    | 5.3 T 0.7               | V                     | V                             | 24.3                      |
| Male             | 425   | 18.5 T 3.3    | 18              | 12 Y 25    | 5.4 T 0.7               | V                     | V                             | 33.7                      |
| Female           | 283   | 17.7 T 3.3    | 17              | 12 Y 25    | 5.2 T 0.7               | V                     | V                             | 10.3                      |

a Mean socioeconomic status based on 2000 U.S. Census records by postal code.

b Significant difference between total initial and follow-up samples at p e .05 after correcting for number of comparisons.

The goal of the present study was to determine the 5year prospective longitudinal stability of these population-based ADHD conceptualizations as well as to test for predictors of diagnostic stability. Possible predictors included demographic factors, treatment histories, and comorbid diagnoses at initial evaluation and prenatal exposure factors that we have previously found to distinguish subtypes.

## METHOD

## Study Participants and Assessments

Approval from the Washington University Medical School institutional review board was obtained before data collection was begun. The study sample (Table 1) was composed of twins identified from birth records of the state of Missouri who had participated in a genetic epidemiology study of the prevalence and heritability of ADHD. 12,20 The original sample included 812 complete male and female twin pairs and six individual twins ages 7 to 19 years at the time of interview identified from the Missouri Twin Registry from 1996 to 2002. As detailed in previous reports, a screening interview assessed the presence of three past or present inattentive symptoms for each twin. Families were invited into the study if either twin of a twin pair exhibited three or more inattentive symptoms ( n = 563 families). Of these families, complete data on both twins were collected in 528 families and complete data on one twin were collected in six families (94.1% completion rate on a twin basis). In addition, 104 families in which at least one child had a Child Behavior Checklist 21 anxious/withdrawn subscale score Q 95th percentile and 183 families randomly selected across birth years were enrolled in the study to keep interviewers blind to diagnosis and to screeners as disease contrast and control subjects, respectively, as described in Neuman et al. 12 Parents were interviewed about their twins, and the youths were interviewed about themselves using the Missouri Assessment of Genetics Interview for Children (MAGIC) to obtain DSM-IV diagnoses and individual symptom information. 17

The MAGIC is a semistructured psychiatric interview based on DSM-III , DSM-IV , and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria; duration and impairment questions (including school/work, family, and friends) are included in each section, and all of the requirements must be met for diagnosis. Three versions of the MAGIC were used for the first study: parent on child or adolescent, child on self (ages 7 Y 12), and adolescent on self (ages 13 Y 18). The MAGIC Child and Adolescent versions used for the first study included diagnostic sections for behavior disorders, substance abuse, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, eating disorders, menstruation, somatization, and psychosocial stressors. The child version was written using simpler sentences and a younger language level. The parent interview was designed to omit questions not appropriate for children ages 7 to 12 (e.g., certain phobia items were not appropriate to ask a child such as going out on a date) and includes a perinatal section (including fetal alcohol and smoking exposure) that can be answered by either parent. For the follow-up study, the three original MAGIC versions were revised to include new sections: antisocial personality disorder, a lengthier tobacco use and abuse section, gambling, agoraphobia, premenstrual dysthymic disorder, psychosis and schizophrenia, home environment, sibling relationships, peer relationships, and health care use.

New versions were also created to address the aging up of the sample at the follow-up stage: parent on young adult (ages 19+) and young adult on self. This enabled appropriate questions to be asked of the young adults and about the young adults; young adults reported on themselves, and parents also reported on young adults. In an accompanying specification manual, age, sex, and

reporter-appropriate examples of interviewer prompts for symptoms and impairment are given. Interview materials are available from the first author. All of the symptoms were recorded as present or absent.

All of the interviews of children 12 years and younger were in person. Adolescents and parents were interviewed in person or by telephone about half the time. This initial version of the MAGIC interview exhibited excellent reliability and 1-year stability of diagnoses for both parent report and child self-report of the major DSM-IV diagnostic categories pertinent to youths. 16

For the follow-up study, the goal was to reassess at least 50 individual youths who had a population-based ADHD subtype diagnosis of moderate combined problems, severe combined problems, moderate inattentive problems, or severe inattention problems as well as at least 50 youths who had a DSM-IV ADHD subtype diagnosis of predominantly inattentive or combined type ADHD (an individual twin could fall in both a DSM-IV category and a latent class category). This design was a compromise based on feasibility and the power to detect a moderate difference in stability between two subtypes with at least 85% power. 22 Cotwins were included without respect to the initial diagnosis. Few youths qualified for a diagnosis of DSM-IV predominantly hyperactivity/ impulsive ADHD at initial evaluation. In addition, we set out to collect at least 75 youths who had no DSM-IV diagnosis of ADHD or who fell into the few symptoms population-based ADHD subtype class. A total of 450 twin pairs and their parents were targeted for reevaluation and 339 twin pairs and 30 individual twins were successfully reevaluated for an overall targeted completion rate of 78.7% (43.4% of the entire sample). Parent report on youths (~95% of the time, the mother reported) and youth self-report interviews were completed on 708 twins from 369 families.

## Diagnostic Assignment

DSM-IV diagnoses of current ADHD and lifetime conduct disorder (CD; n = 19), oppositional defiant disorder (ODD; n = 133), major depressive disorder (MDD; n = 46), generalized anxiety disorders ( n = 9), alcohol dependence ( n = 19) and abuse ( n = 33), and regular nicotine use ( n = 79) at time 1 and current ADHD diagnosis at time 2 were made by computer algorithm and included all DSM-IV criteria as described. 12,13,23 Parent report was used for ADHD and ODD. Self-report was used for all other diagnoses. Diagnoses, such as bipolar disorder, were not included because they were too infrequent to be meaningfully analyzed. 24 One hundred seventy-four youths had been exposed to maternal alcohol consumption and 151 had been exposed to maternal smoking prenatally.

Population-based ADHD subtype assignment using the DSM-IV ADHD symptoms was made using the program LCAP-CA (available at http://hardy.wustl.edu ) and class assignment parameter values derived from the combined analysis of the previously described twin studies. 11,14 Due to the targeted follow-up design, unbiased latent classes cannot be derived from the follow-up data directly. Parent report of the presence or absence of their offspring \_ s current ADHD symptoms was used for class assignment for both the initial and follow-up evaluations.

## Statistical Analyses

All of the analyses were conducted using SAS (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC), except for logistic regression analyses. The percentage of ADHD subtype stability was calculated for both DSM-IV and population-based nosologies and statistical significance assessed using the 0 statistic, which in this case is a measure of the nonchance agreement between two observations of a categorical diagnosis (i.e., having the same ADHD subtype at the two interviews separated by 5 years). The 0 statistic is widely used to test the agreement between two measures (such as whether a patient is given the same diagnosis by two clinicians or given the same diagnosis at two different evaluations) and can be thought of as chance-corrected proportion in which a value of 1 equals perfect agreement. The 0 statistic was also used to test for significant transitions between ADHD subtypes (i.e., having a different ADHD subtype at follow-up). To test for age group effects, analyses were repeated for individuals who were 7 to 11 ( n = 287), 12 to 16 ( n = 289), or 17 to 19 ( n = 132) years of age at initial evaluation. These age groups were chosen to approximate the prepubertal, adolescent, and young adult periods.

Univariate and multivariate logistic regression was used for determining predictors (or correlates) of stability, including adjustment of significance levels for twins being in the same family by use of the Huber-White sandwich variance estimator (the B cluster [ and B robust [ options in STATA [StataCorp LP, College Station, TX]). In addition to age, sex, race, and socioeconomic status, time 1 factors considered included child stimulant medication use; exposure prenatally to maternal alcohol consumption or smoking; and child ODD, CD, MDD, generalized anxiety disorders, alcohol dependence or abuse, and regular tobacco use. These variables were chosen due to previous studies suggesting subtype or severity specificity of the covariates or as general demographic control variables. All of the significant predictors from univariate logistic regression analyses were included in multivariate analyses. Repeat runs removed items that were no longer significant until only significant predictors remained in the models. For significant predictors, the partial odds ratio corresponds to the independent relative risk attributable to that variable. To determine the significance of multiple statistics tests, we use a Bonferroni-type multiple-testing procedure 25 to control the false discovery rate at the level of .05.

## RESULTS

The principal sampling goals of the study were to reinterview at least 50 subjects in the relevant ADHD subtypes and their cotwins for prospective evaluation 5 years later. As noted in Tables 1 and 3, these goals were obtained for the targeted major ADHD subtypes including DSM-IV Y defined predominantly inattentive and combined subtypes and population-defined moderate combined, moderate inattentive, severe combined, and severe inattentive subtypes. Average follow-up interval was 5.3 T 0.7 years and did not differ significantly by sex. For time 1 variables, the follow-up sample was largely representative of the initial sample with respect to census data Y derived socioeconomic status, percentage of African Americans, sex, and stimulant medication use (Table 1). There were slightly fewer African Americans (11.2% versus 14.6%), a slightly higher mean income ($35,272.70 versus $34,485.10), and slightly higher stimulant use levels (22.3% versus 19.5%) in the follow-up sample.

TABLE 2 5-Year Stability of Present Symptom Endorsement

| Symptom                         |   Endorsed Initially ( n ) |   % Endorsed Time 2 |     0 |
|---------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------|-------|
| Close attention to detail       |                        266 |                  44 | 0.367 |
| Difficulty sustaining attention |                        248 |                  40 | 0.334 |
| Does not seem to listen         |                        155 |                  32 | 0.313 |
| Fails to finish                 |                        234 |                  44 | 0.374 |
| Difficulty organizing           |                        290 |                  44 | 0.358 |
| Avoids tasks                    |                        205 |                  40 | 0.355 |
| Often loses things              |                        160 |                  41 | 0.368 |
| Easily distracted               |                        275 |                  43 | 0.374 |
| Often forgetful                 |                        149 |                  40 | 0.367 |
| Often fidgets                   |                        169 |                  31 | 0.306 |
| Often leaves seat               |                         99 |                  28 | 0.279 |
| Often runs                      |                        124 |                  35 | 0.336 |
| Difficulty playing quietly      |                         94 |                  26 | 0.291 |
| On the go                       |                         97 |                  28 | 0.257 |
| Talks excessively               |                        153 |                  35 | 0.339 |
| Blurts out answers              |                         97 |                  24 | 0.242 |
| Difficulty waiting turn         |                        101 |                  35 | 0.356 |
| Often interrupts                |                        179 |                  34 | 0.354 |

Note: Symptom descriptions are paraphrased from DSM-IV . Individual symptom 0 values ranged from 0.24 to 0.37; all p e .0001. Mean percentage of stability was 40.9 T 3.8% for inattentive (1 Y 9), 30.5 T 3.8% for hyperactive (10 Y 15), and 31.0 T 6.1% for impulsive (16 Y 18) symptoms.

## Individual ADHD Symptom Stability

Because complete symptom information was collected on all of the individuals at both times, individual symptom stability over the 5-year follow-up period was calculated. As shown in Table 2, the nine inattentive symptoms tended to have higher individual stability scores than the hyperactive/impulsive symptoms (40.9 T 3.8% versus 30.7 T 4.3%). The main exception to this was the inattentive symptom of B does not seem to listen [ (32%), which had a symptom stability score close to that of the hyperactive/impulsive symptoms. In general, hyperactive/impulsive symptoms were endorsed less frequently at both time 1 and time 2 and showed lower stability on 5-year follow-up.

## ADHD Subtype Stability

Tables 3 and 4 present the primary outcome data with stability assessed using the 0 statistic. In keeping with a variety of previous reports of various ADHD

diagnostic conceptualizations, there was poor diagnostic stability for the major DSM-IV ADHD subtypes (Table 3). The most stable was the combined subtype in which 24.0% of youths had the same diagnosis at follow-up, whereas the predominantly inattentive and hyperactive/impulsive subtypes had stabilities of 17.7% and 11.1%, respectively. For the population-defined ADHD subtypes, stability was generally higher (Table 3), especially for the clinically significant severe combined (35.3%) and severe inattentive subtypes (22.9%). Fewer cases of some additional subtypes are included in the follow-up (these being cotwins of individuals who were included with a clinically significant subtype). These had lower stabilities. The least stable ADHD subtype by either nosology was the hyperactivity/impulsive subtype. The highest stabilities were for the noDSM-IV ADHDclass (96.5%) and the few ADHD symptoms class (88.8%). Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses (does time 1 ADHD subtype predict time 2 ADHD subtype?) confirmed the results of the 0 analyses (data not shown).

TABLE 3

5-Year Subtype Stability of ADHD Subtypes

| Subtype                                            | Time 1, n                                          | Same Subtype at Time 2, n (%)                      | 0                                                  |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| DSM-IV subtypes                                    | DSM-IV subtypes                                    | DSM-IV subtypes                                    | DSM-IV subtypes                                    |
| No ADHD                                            | 570                                                | 550 (96.5)                                         | .316 a                                             |
| Inattentive                                        | 79                                                 | 14 (17.7)                                          | .180 a                                             |
| Hyperactive/ impulsive                             | 9                                                  | 1 (11.1)                                           | .147 a                                             |
| Combined                                           | 50                                                 | 12 (24.0)                                          | .334 a                                             |
| Any ADHD                                           | 138                                                | 39 (28.3)                                          | .316 a                                             |
| Population-based ADHD latent class, time 1 subtype | Population-based ADHD latent class, time 1 subtype | Population-based ADHD latent class, time 1 subtype | Population-based ADHD latent class, time 1 subtype |
| FEW                                                | 339                                                | 301 (88.8)                                         | .464 a                                             |
| MIA                                                | 105                                                | 18 (17.1)                                          | .046                                               |
| TALK                                               | 31                                                 | 3 (9.7)                                            | .086                                               |
| MCMB                                               | 77                                                 | 11 (14.3)                                          | .154 a                                             |
| MHYP                                               | 12                                                 | 0 (0)                                              | 0                                                  |
| SCMB                                               | 68                                                 | 24 (35.3)                                          | .418 a                                             |
| SIA                                                | 70                                                 | 16 (22.9)                                          | .211 a                                             |
| HYP                                                | 6                                                  | 0 (0)                                              | 0                                                  |

Note: ADHD = attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. FEW = few symptoms; MIA = moderate inattentive; TALK = talkative; MCMB = moderate combined; MHYP = moderate hyperactive; SCMB = severe combined, SIA = severe inattentive; HYP = hyperactive.

a 0 values significant at p &lt; .0001 level.

J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 47:1, JANUARY 2008

TABLE 4 Shifts in Categorical ADHD Subtype on 5-Year Follow-up

|                                | Time 2                         | Time 2   | Time 2      | Time 2   | Time 2   | Time 2   | Time 2                 | Time 2                 | Time 2   | Time 2   |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------|-------------|----------|----------|----------|------------------------|------------------------|----------|----------|
| Time 1                         | None                           |          | Inattentive |          |          | Combined | Hyperactive/ Impulsive | Hyperactive/ Impulsive | Total    |          |
| DSM-IV ADHD subtypes           |                                |          |             |          |          |          |                        |                        |          |          |
| None                           | 550 a                          |          | 14          | a        | 3 a      |          | 3                      |                        | 570      |          |
| Inattentive                    | 63 a                           |          | 14          | a        | 2        |          | 0                      |                        | 79       |          |
| Combined                       | 28 a                           |          | 10          | a        | 12 a     |          | 0                      |                        | 50       |          |
| Hyperactive                    | 8                              |          | 0           |          | 0        |          | 1                      |                        | 9        |          |
| Total                          | 649                            |          | 38          |          | 17       |          | 4                      |                        | 708      |          |
|                                | Time 2                         | Time 2   | Time 2      | Time 2   | Time 2   | Time 2   | Time 2                 | Time 2                 | Time 2   | Time 2   |
| Time 1                         | FEW                            | MIA      | TALK        | MCMB     | MHYP     | SCMB     | SIA                    | HYP                    | Total    |          |
| Population-based ADHD subtypes | Population-based ADHD subtypes |          |             |          |          |          |                        |                        |          |          |
| FEW                            | 301 a                          | 17 a     | 4 a         | 3 a      | 4 a      | 1 a      | 7 a                    | 2                      | 339      |          |
| MIA                            | 70                             | 18       | 2           | 5        | 3        | 1        | 6                      | 0                      | 105      |          |
| TALK                           | 19                             | 5        | 3           | 1        | 0        | 1        | 1                      | 1 a                    | 31       |          |
| MCMB                           | 27 a                           | 17       | 6 a         | 11 a     | 6 a      | 5        | 5                      | 0                      | 77       |          |
| MHYP                           | 9                              | 0        | 0           | 1        | 0        | 2        | 0                      | 0                      | 12       |          |
| SCMB                           | 9 a                            | 7        | 4           | 6        | 6 a      | 24 a     | 12 a                   | 0                      | 68       |          |
| SIA                            | 17 a                           | 30 a     | 1           | 2        | 1        | 3        | 16 a                   | 0                      | 70       |          |
| HYP                            | 3                              | 1        | 0           | 1        | 1        | 0        | 0                      | 0                      | 6        |          |
| Total                          | 455                            | 95       | 20          | 30       | 21       | 37       | 47                     | 3                      | 708      |          |

Note: All of the subtype designations are based on parent report about offspring. Different interviewers completed the parent version of the Missouri Assessment of Genetics Interview for Children by telephone for each twin without knowledge of the time 1 interview results. DSM-IV subtypes: inattentive = predominantly inattentive; combined = combined; and hyperactive = predominantly hyperactive/impulsive subtype. Population-based subtypes: FEW = few symptoms; MIA = moderate inattentive; TALK = talkative; MCMB = moderate combined; MHYP = moderate hyperactive; SCMB = severe combined, SIA = severe inattentive; HYP = hyperactive. ADHD = attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

a Significant 0 values after controlling for false discovery rate at .05 (see Method section).

## Effect of Age on Stability

To test whether there were different patterns of ADHD subtype stability for the transitions of childhood to young adolescence, young adolescence to older adolescence, and older adolescence to young adulthood, analyses were repeated for individuals who were in the age groups 7 to 11 years of age, 12 to 16 years of age, and 17 to 19 years of age at initial assessment. There were no significant differences in subtype stability for DSM-IV Y defined predominantly inattentive and combined subtypes or for having any DSM-IV ADHD diagnosis. In contrast, the stability of populationdefined severe combined type ADHD significantly decreased with age from 39% for the childhood to young adolescence transition, to 37% for the young adolescence to older adolescence transition, and to only 13% for the older adolescence to young adulthood transition ( p = .0002). The pattern was reversed for the severe inattentive ADHD subtype with stability of 22% for the childhood to young adolescence transition, to 18% for the young adolescence to older adolescent transition, but to 40% for the older adolescence to young adult transition ( p = .002). There were no significant differences in the stability of the moderate inattention problems or moderate combined problems classes across these age periods.

## ADHD Subtype Transitions

The predominant transition for DSM-IV ADHD was from affected to not affected for all subtypes (Table 4). For example, of the 79 predominantly inattentive ADHDcases at time 1, 63 are not affected at time 2 ( 0 p &lt; .0001), whereas only two transitioned to combined type (not significant). Similarly, eight of the nine predominantly hyperactive/impulsive subjects at time 1 are unaffected at time 2. The patterns were somewhat

TABLE 5 Significant Predictors of Subtype Stability

| ADHD Subtype (Predictor)                                                          | Odds Ratio   | 95% CI       | p    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|------|
| DSM-IV Y based subtype DSM-IV inattentive ADHD ODD at time 1 DSM-IV combined ADHD | 5.05         | 1.53 Y 16.62 | .008 |
| Verbal IQ at time 1                                                               | 0.67         | 0.47 Y 0.94  | .022 |
| Population-based subtype                                                          |              |              |      |
| Moderate inattentive ADHD Medication at time 1                                    | 0.09         | 0.01 Y 0.66  | .018 |
| Moderate combined ADHD ODD at time 1                                              | 4.36         | 1.25 Y 15.17 | .020 |
| Severe inattentive ADHD No predictors                                             | NA           | NA           | NA   |
| Severe combined ADHD Medication at time 1                                         | 8.55         | 2.09 Y 35.05 | .003 |
| ODD at time 1                                                                     | 5.05         | 1.91 Y 13.33 | .001 |
| Age at time 1                                                                     | 0.81         | 0.70 Y 0.94  | .005 |

Note: Results are partial odds ratios for multivariate logistic regressions for each ADHD subtype controlling for age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and family clustering. All of the significant predictors remain significant after controlling false discovery rate at the level of .05. See Method section for details. ADHD = attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; ODD = oppositional defiant disorder; NA = not applicable.

more complex for combined type ADHD. Ten subjects transitioned to the predominantly inattentive subtype, whereas 28 are no longer affected (both 0 p values &lt; .001). These 10 predominantly inattentive subjects at time 2 still had some hyperactive/impulsive symptoms but not enough to meet full combined criteria. As noted in Table 4, 20 individuals who had no DSM-IV ADHD diagnosis at time 1 received a diagnosis at time 2. All of these individuals had some ADHD symptoms at time 1 but did not meet full DSM-IV criteria. It should be stressed, however, that this transition of 20 individuals represents a stability of 96.5% for the no-ADHD diagnosis.

The pattern of transition between population-based ADHD subtypes was somewhat more complex (Table 4). Focusing on the clinically significant subtypes of moderate combined, severe combined and severe inattentive subtypes, 20 30 of 70 severe inattentive individuals moved to the moderate attention problems class, and 17 moved to the few problems class (both 0 p &lt; .0001). Seven other individuals moved to a different population-based class (all 0 values are nonsignificant). Individuals who at time 1 were in the moderate combined class mostly moved to the few symptoms class, whereas a variety of individuals are scattered across other classes including six each in the talkative and moderate hyperactive/impulsive classes ( 0 p e .008) classes. The severe combined population-based ADHD subtypes showed a more complex pattern of transition, with 9 of 68 going to the few symptoms class ( 0 p e .0001), 12 going to the severe attention problems class ( 0 p = .0001), 6 going to the moderate hyperactive/ impulsive class ( 0 p = .0027), and the remainder going to intermediate severity classes (nonsignificant 0 values). Overall, this pattern for the severe combined type was similar to that of the DSM-IV combined type in that the major transitions are to the severe inattention problems class. Thirty-eight individuals who were in the few symptoms class at time 1 moved to other populationbased types including 7 to the severe inattention problems class, 1 to the severe combined class, three to the moderate combined class, and 17 to the moderate attention problems class (all 0 p e .0001). This again follows the general pattern for the DSM-IV unaffected subtype, in which the predominant shift was from unaffected to the predominantly inattentive ADHD subtype.

## Predictors of Diagnostic Stability

Multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine potential factors that predicted or enhanced stability of diagnosis on follow-up. Time 1 factors considered included child stimulant medication use, exposure prenatally to maternal alcohol consumption or smoking, child ODD, CD, MDD, generalized anxiety disorders, alcohol dependence or abuse, and regular tobacco use. All individual significant predictors from univariate analyses were included in multivariate logistic regression analysis as described in the Method section.

As shown in Table 5, there were no significant predictors across ADHD subtypes. There were several subtype-specific predictors. For the DSM-IV subtypes, parent-reported ODD is a predictor of stability of the predominantly inattentive ADHD subtype, and lower verbal IQ is a predictor of combined type ADHD. For the population-defined subtypes, there were no significant predictors of severe inattentive ADHD, whereas parent-reported comorbid ODD, younger age, and medication use were predictors of stability for severe combined type ADHD. Parent-reported ODD was also a significant predictor of moderate combined

type stability, although the confidence interval is quite wide. Time 1 twin alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, and regular smoking were not significant predictors of diagnostic stability over this time course. The pattern of predictors is the same whether parent or youth selfreports of CD, generalized anxiety disorder, MDD, alcohol abuse or dependence, and regular smoking were included.

## DISCUSSION

A perplexing issue in the study of ADHD is the contrast between universally high reports of heritability at different ages versus the lack of diagnostic stability with increasing age from preschool to adulthood. Many authors have argued that this reflects in part the reduction in hyperactive/impulsive symptoms with age or transitions in behavioral presentations between childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Others have noted a number of methodological flaws in follow-up studies that may contribute to diagnostic instability, including changes in reporter (parent versus self) and nonblind reinterviews. 9 In the present study, we used a population-based sampling to identify ADHD cases in childhood and adolescence and blind reassessment of the same reporters (parents) with age-appropriate diagnostic instruments at 5-year follow-up. We were also able to control for the effects of sociodemographic factors, comorbidity, and treatment in estimating stability of diagnosis. Because DSM-IV ADHD criteria were developed primarily from clinical samples and may not reflect the true nature of this disorder or group of disorders in the general population, we also applied population-based definitions of ADHD that appear to be phenotypically more homogeneous and genotypically distinct based on twin studies.

Despite controlling for a variety of potential confounds, and using population-defined definitions of ADHD, we still find significant diagnostic instability in the transition from childhood to adolescence and adolescence to young adulthood. Although the population-defined criteria are on average about 25% more stable than the DSM-IV conceptualizations, 5-year stability still only ranges between 14% and 35% depending on the clinically significant subtype and age transition.

One potential confound of such follow-up studies is that symptoms may not be elicited if individuals are treated successfully. This is particularly problematic for assessments of classroom behavior or on-the-job behavior due to introduction of the long-acting stimulants during the time course of this study, making raters largely ignorant of nonmedicated symptom status. In the present study, we continued to use parent reports about adolescent and young adult behavior. Parents primarily see their offspring after medications have worn off or during periods when they are not taken, such as weekends and holidays. Of note, &lt;50% of individuals meeting DSM-IV ADHD diagnostic criteria in this sample had ever been treated with medication at initial evaluation. 23 Whether these medications were used appropriately in this sample is unknown. Even given this factor, the main predictor of diagnostic stability for two ADHD subtypes (moderate inattentive and severe combined) was history of medication use at the initial interview. Hence, rather than being a potential confound for interpreting the present results, medication use appears to be a good predictor of future diagnostic stability for some subgroups.

The poor diagnostic stability cannot be ascribed in general to dropout of particular inattentive or hyperactive/impulsive ADHD symptoms for ADHD subtypes. As shown in Table 2, there was general higher stability of inattentive symptoms, but the inattentive and hyperactive symptoms seem to have within-group stability. Supporting the concept that ADHD is not a unitary syndrome but rather a variety of overlapping syndromes of heterogeneous etiology, several ADHD subtype specific predictors of diagnostic stability were also identified. These ranged from lower verbal IQ to comorbid disruptive behavior disorder diagnoses.

Several previous studies have reported possible gene Y environment interactions with dopamine pathway gene polymorphisms in youths exposed prenatally to cigarette smoke or alcohol. 19 A shortcoming of these studies is the lack of assessment of both smoking and drinking in the same pregnancies or superficial recording of the presence or absence of these behaviors among mothers during pregnancy. In previous twin studies, we demonstrated the significance of prenatal exposure to alcohol 26 and smoking 19 in two different Missouri twin populations. In the present study, we find that neither maternal smoking nor drinking during pregnancy is associated with diagnostic stability. This suggests that ADHD associated with these prenatal

factors is not more severe or persistent than ADHD in general.

The present findings using population-based and DSM-IV ADHD subtypes replicate and extend previous findings of the marked instability of our current conceptualizations of ADHD. As noted in the introduction, one possible explanation for this is the lack of age-specific diagnostic criteria that are sensitive to developmental changes over time and to sex differences. Given the lack of developmentally sensitive criteria, how are we to explain the high heritability that has been uniformly reported for ADHD over a broad age range? The twin studies, which have almost uniformly reported high heritability for ADHD, share a common feature: perfect age matching for twin births. This may result in the detection of high heritability even in the absence of diagnostic stability (if this instability is due to factors that affect both twins equally, such as the aging process or shared psychosocial stresses). Hence, a twin design may be well suited to detecting high heritability in the presence of developmental instability. The implications of this observation for gene-finding studies (which usually exclude twins) are obvious and profound.

Although population-based ADHD subtypes had somewhat higher stabilities over the study interval, these subtypes also had larger age effects. For DSM-IV subtypes, there were no significant stability differences between the child to young adolescent, young adolescent to older adolescent, and the older adolescent to young adult transitions. In contrast, populationdefined severe combined type ADHD had higher stability for younger transitions (37% Y 39% versus 13%), whereas the severe inattentive subtype had the highest stability for the older adolescent to young adult transition (18% Y 22% versus 40%). These populationbased subtype differences may reflect both decreased hyperactivity and impulsivity symptoms with age and the increased homogeneity of the population-based subtypes. The severe combined subtype averages more than seven inattentive and seven hyperactive/impulsive symptoms per youth, whereas the severe inattentive subtype averages more that six inattentive but fewer than two hyperactive/impulsive symptoms. The agedependent decrease in hyperactive/impulsive symptoms would preferentially affect the severe combined type (shifting young cases to the severe and mild inattentive cases as seen in Table 4). The stability of the severe inattentive class would initially decrease with the shift of hyperactive/impulsive symptom cases at the child and young adolescent transitions, but this would occur less frequently during the older adolescent-young adult transition, resulting in the higher observed stability. Given this unexpected finding, replication is required before accepting this explanation.

Despite the prospective, large-scale blind reassessment of youths at high risk of ADHD, the present study is not without limitations. First, the sample is exclusively composed of twins. To the extent that twins may be at increased risk of ADHD secondary to possible risk of perinatal complications and so forth, these results may not be wholly representative of nontwin populations. Given that the overall finding of the study, lack of diagnostic stability, is similar to several previous clinically based studies of nontwins, this is probably not a major issue in interpreting the results of the study. Second, although participation in the follow-up study was high, there was a slight but significant decrease in the percentage of participation of African Americans and a slightly higher censusbased gross family income for participants versus the sample at large. Overall, such demographic or socioeconomic differences are small and, we believe, unlikely to bias the results or their interpretation. Third, despite the large size of this follow-up sample, the overrepresentation of ADHD in boys limited our ability to test for female-specific differences in a powerful way. Fourth, the design of sampling 50 or more youths in each ADHD subtype, which provided adequate statistical power to examine subtype differences in diagnostic stability, may have limited the ability to detect modifiers of stability of moderate or weak effect. Fifth, to preserve the comparison of specific subtype criteria at 5-year follow-up, no consideration of partial remission was included. This is currently a poorly described category. Further analysis of the present data set may help outline specific criteria for this popular concept. A final limitation of the present study is the inclusion of young adult self-report and parent on young adult report of ADHD symptoms. Although the reliability and validity of child and adolescent self-report and parent report on child and adolescent youth using the MAGIC interview has been well documented, 16 we do not have equivalent data for young adult forms of the interview.

The present findings have implications for development of more valid diagnostic criteria in upcoming changes to categorizations such as the planned DSM-V . Given the demonstration of important age and sex effects, in particular transitions from childhood to adolescence and adolescence to adulthood, the framers of DSM-V should consider the inclusion of developmentally sensitive and appropriate diagnostic criteria that can span the age range. Lahey et al. 5 suggested using continuous ratings of hyperactivity/impulsivity symptoms as a diagnostic qualifier. Whether such an addition would adequately address life span issues, especially in adulthood, is undetermined, but this suggestion does offer a testable framework for criteria modification before the planned introduction of revisions. The increased stability of population-defined ADHD subtypes, although far from perfect, also indicates that alternative groupings of ADHD symptoms or criteria may offer diagnostic advantages.

Disclosure: The authors have no financial relationships to disclose.

## REFERENCES

1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition-Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.
2. Faraone SV, Perlis RH, Doyle AE, et al. Molecular genetics of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry . 2005;57:1313 Y 1323.
3. Hill JC, Schoener EP. Age-dependent decline of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1996;153:1143 Y 1146.
4. Faraone SV, Biederman J, Mick E. The age-dependent decline of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis of follow-up studies. Psychol Med . 2006;36:159 Y 165.
5. Lahey BB, Pelham WE, Loney J, et al. Instability of the DSM-IV subtypes of ADHD from preschool through elementary school. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:896 Y 902.
6. Larsson H, Lichtenstein P, Larsson JO. Genetic contributions to the development of ADHD subtypes from childhood to adolescence. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2006;45:973 Y 981.
7. Rietveld MJ, Hudziak JJ, Bartels M, et al. Heritability of attention problems in children: longitudinal results from a study of twins, age 3 to 12. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2004;45:577 Y 588.
8. Biederman J, Monuteaux MC, Mick E, et al. Young adult outcome of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a controlled 10-year follow-up study. Psychol Med. 2006;36:167 Y 179.
9. Mannuzza S, Klein RG, Moulton JL. Persistence of attention-deficit/
10. hyperactivity disorder into adulthood: what have we learned from the prospective follow-up studies? J Atten Disord . 2003;7:93 Y 100.
10. McCutcheon AL. Latent class analysis. In: Sage University Papers Series Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, Niemi RG, ed., Series No. 07-064 . Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1987, pp 50 Y 110.
11. Todd RD, Rasmussen ER, Neuman RJ, et al. Familiality and heritability of subtypes of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a population sample of adolescent female twins. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158:1891 Y 1898.
12. Neuman RJ, Sitdhiraksa N, Reich W, et al. Estimation of prevalence of DSM-IV and latent class-defined ADHD subtypes in a populationbased sample of child and adolescent twins. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2005;8:392 Y 401.
13. Volk HE, Henderson C, Neuman RJ, et al. Validation of populationbased ADHD subtypes and identification of three clinically impaired subtypes. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet . 2006;141: 312 Y 318.
14. Rasmussen ER, Neuman RJ, Heath AC, et al. Replication of the latent class structure of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) subtypes in a sample of Australian twins. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2002;43:1018 Y 1028.
15. Rasmussen ER, Neuman RJ, Heath AC, et al. Familial clustering of latent class and DSM-IV defined attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) subtypes. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2004;45: 589 Y 598.
16. Todd RD, Joyner CA, Heath AC, et al. Reliability and stability of a semistructured DSM-IV interview designed for family studies. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:1460 Y 1468.
17. Todd RD, Lobos EA, Sun LW, et al. Mutational analysis of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit gene in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: evidence for association of an intronic polymorphism with attention problems. Mol Psychiatry . 2003;8: 103 Y 108.
18. Todd RD, Huang H, Smalley SL, et al. Collaborative analysis of DRD4 and DAT genotypes in population-defined ADHD subtypes. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2005;46:1067 Y 1073.
19. Neuman RJ, Lobos E, Reich W, et al. Prenatal smoking exposure and dopaminergic genotypes interact to cause a severe ADHD subtype. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61:1320 Y 1328.
20. Volk HE, Neuman RJ, Todd RD. A systematic evaluation of ADHD and comorbid psychopathology in a population-based twin sample. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:768 Y 775.
21. Achenbach TM. Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 . Burlington: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry; 1991.
22. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences , 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.
23. Reich W, Huang H, Todd RD. ADHD medication use in a population-based sample of twins. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;45:801 Y 807.
24. Reich W, Neuman RJ, Volk HE, et al. Comorbidity between ADHD and symptoms of bipolar disorder in a community sample of children and adolescents. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2005;8:459 Y 466.
25. Benjamin Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc Series B. 1995;57:289 Y 300.
26. Knopik VS, Sparrow EP, Madden PA, et al. Contributions of parental alcoholism, prenatal substance exposure, and genetic transmission to child ADHD risk: a female twin study. Psychol Med . 2005;35: 625 Y 635.