## Chapter 2

## Amphetamine Usage, Misuse, and Addiction Processes: An Overview

Nicola Simola 1 , Manolo Carta 2

1 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Neuropsychopharmacology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy;  2 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Physiology, University of Cagliari, University Campus, Monserrato, Italy

## Abbreviations

ADHD Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder CART Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript MDMA 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine

## INTRODUCTION

Amphetamines are synthetic drugs that share many structural and functional similarities with endogenous amines. Amphetamine ( α -methylphenethylamine)  is  the  leading  compound  of  this class of drugs and exists in two stereoisomeric forms, of which d -amphetamine  is  the  most  potent  (Taylor  &amp;  Snyder,  1970). The  relatively  simple  chemistry  of  amphetamines,  together with the almost unlimited number of structural rearrangements that can be introduced in the amphetaminic scaffold, have led to the generation of a huge number of amphetamine derivatives (Figure  1).  Some  of  them  display  a  pharmacological  profile which  closely  resembles  that  of  the  parent  compound  (e.g., methamphetamine), while others have atypical pharmacological properties (e.g., 3,4-methylenedioxymethylamphetamine, also known as MDMA or 'ecstasy'). Nevertheless, amphetamines as a class of drug are characterized by a common mechanism of action,  the  possession  of  addictive  properties,  and  the  ability  to elicit toxicity at both the central and peripheral level (Carvalho et al., 2012).

Many  of  the  biological  effects  elicited  by  amphetamines overlap those of endogenous amines, due to the structural similarities existing between these molecules. Importantly, amphetamines do not act by directly stimulating the receptors that bind endogenous amines (mostly dopamine and norepinephrine), but rather  promote  the  release  of  these  molecules  from  neuronal terminals  (Brodie,  Cho,  Stefano,  &amp;  Gessa,  1969)  (Figure  2). This  mechanism  of  action  explains  why  the  pharmacological  profile  of  amphetamines differs from that of drugs which directly stimulate dopamine and norepinephrine receptors, and accounts for the basis of the addictive properties of these drugs (Koob &amp; Nestler, 1997).

## USAGE, MISUSE, AND ADDICTION PROCESSES

Some of the effects elicited by amphetamines have medical relevance; therefore, amphetamine derivatives have been, and still are, used as therapeutic agents. The most common indications for amphetamines are nasal decongestion, psychostimulation, enhancement of attention, and suppression of appetite (Figure 3).

Amphetamine was introduced in the market as a nasal decongestant at the beginning of the twentieth century (Iversen, 2008), based on its ability to release norepinephrine at the level of the small vessels, causing vasoconstriction and eventually resulting in decongestion. While amphetamine proved to be very efficacious in eliciting this effect, its use as a decongestant led to wide substance  misuse  and  abuse,  and,  in  many  cases,  to  cardiovascular toxicity  (Iversen,  2008). Therefore,  the  use  of  amphetamines  as nasal decongestants is now very limited, and narrowed to those derivatives that do not elicit psychostimulation and are devoid of abuse potential (e.g., l -methamphetamine). At variance with this, amphetamine-related drugs, and in particular d -amphetamine, are still widely used as psychostimulants in several conditions where a heightened attention is desirable, and for the reduction of appetite in the treatment of obesity.

Psychostimulation  is  the  most  well-characterized  effect  of amphetamine, and can be consistently reproduced at both the preclinical and clinical level. Data collected in experimental animals indicate  that  the  psychostimulation  induced  by  amphetamine  is a  complex phenomenon, which gives rise to markedly different behaviors,  depending  on  the  dose  of  drug  administered.  Low doses of amphetamine stimulate locomotor activity (Strömberg &amp; Svensson,  1975),  while  higher  doses  trigger  the  so-called  'stereotyped  behaviors'  which  consist  of  persisting  and  repetitive behaviors that do not have any ethological or functional significance, such as self-grooming, gnawing, licking, or sniffing (Nelson &amp; Ellison, 1978). A similar pattern of psychostimulation can be observed in humans, where amphetamine improves mood and attention at low doses, but triggers compulsive and psychotic-like behaviors after either the administration of high doses or prolonged

FIGURE  1 Chemical  structures  of  endogenous  monoaminergic  neurotransmitters  and  of  the  most  common  amphetamine-related  drugs. Amphetamine and methamphetamine show structural similarities with dopamine and noradrenaline, which are at the basis of the sympathomimetic effects of these psychostimulants. Conversely, MDMA displays closer structural similarities with serotonin, which justifies the peculiar pharmacological profile of this drug.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 2 Mechanisms of action of amphetamine. Amphetamine can directly penetrate into the presynaptic terminals or, most importantly, can be taken up by the membrane transporters for dopamine (DAT) or norepinephrine (NET), according to the specific neuronal type considered. Once inside the presynaptic terminals, amphetamine is pumped inside intracellular vesicles by the vesicular transporter (VT). Thereafter, amphetamine displaces monoamines from vesicles, causing a dramatic increase in their cytoplasmic concentrations. This, in turn, promotes a massive outflow of monoamines through the membrane transporters, leading to an increase in monoamine extracellular concentrations which eventually bind to postsynaptic receptors, hence producing the pharmacological effects of amphetamine.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 3 Overview of the most common effects of amphetamine in humans. Amphetamine elicits both central and peripheral effects. The majority of these effects stem from the ability of amphetamine to release catecholamines from nerve terminals. Some of the effects of amphetamine have medical relevance, while others may result in the misuse (and eventually abuse) of the drug, or toxicity.

<!-- image -->

consumption  (Calello  &amp;  Osterhoudt,  2004;  Servan-Schreiber, Carter, Bruno, &amp; Cohen, 1998). The psychostimulant effects of amphetamine that can be observed after its administration at low doses include euphoria, resistance to fatigue, and improved task performance, particularly of those tasks that require a sustained attention over an extended period of time (Caldwell, Caldwell, &amp; Darlington, 2003; Servan-Schreiber et al., 1998). These effects of amphetamine appear to be of relevance not only for certain professional conditions where vigilance is crucial (e.g., the military personnel), but also for those pathologies that feature a reduction in attention, such as narcolepsy and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Today, the treatment of ADHD is the most important medical  use  of  amphetamine. ADHD  is  a  complex  neuropsychiatric condition  that  becomes  manifest  in  preschool  children,  and  can be  characterized  by  hyperactivity,  impulsivity,  and  inattention, though not necessarily all at the same time (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). ADHD has an estimated world prevalence of 5-7% in children and adolescents, can severely impact the quality of life of the affected individuals, and may persist into adulthood  if  not  adequately  treated  (Staller  &amp;  Faraone,  2006).  Even though the precise neurobiological bases of ADHD are not known, it appears increasingly clearer that this condition features a hypoactivity  of  the  prefrontal  cortex  (Arnsten  &amp;  Pliszka,  2011),  an area critically involved in the regulation of attention and executive functions  (Miller  &amp;  Buschman,  2013). Therefore,  the  ability  of amphetamine to  release  catecholamines  in  the  prefrontal  cortex

(Shoblock, Sullivan, Maisonneuve, &amp; Glick, 2003) may justify its effectiveness as a drug for the treatment of ADHD. Amphetamine is nowadays a drug of choice in the management of ADHD, notwithstanding  the  development  of  other  effective  medications, such  as  methylphenidate,  a  nonamphetaminic  psychostimulant, and  atomoxetine,  a  norepinephrine  reuptake  inhibitor  (Reddy, 2013).  Amphetamine  is  currently  marketed  under  the  name  of Dexedrine ® , which is composed of d -amphetamine, or Adderall ® , which is a mixture of d - and l -amphetamine in a 3:1 ratio. Retrospective  comparisons  have  demonstrated  that Adderall  has  an efficacy comparable to that of methylphenidate in the treatment of ADHD (Grcevich, Rowane, Marcellino, &amp; Sullivan-Hurst, 2001). Moreover, Adderall has a longer duration of action than methylphenidate,  a  feature  that  can  significantly  improve  the  patient's therapeutic  compliance  (Faraone,  Biederman,  &amp;  Roe,  2002). A new avenue in  the  use  of  amphetamine  for  the  management  of ADHD is represented  by  lisdexamfetamine,  which  has  recently been  introduced  in  the  market.  Lisdexamfetamine  is  a  prodrug (Figure  4),  that  is  metabolized  into d -amphetamine  inside  the red blood cells (Pennick, 2010), and clinical studies have demonstrated that lisdexamfetamine has a positive effect on the symptoms of ADHD and can be more efficacious than methylphenidate (Soutullo et al., 2013).

The  reduction  of  appetite  is  another  effect  of  amphetamine and  its  related  drugs  that  has  medical  relevance.  Initial  reports describing  the  potential  of  these  substances  as  pharmacological aids in the treatment of obesity date back to the twentieth century

FIGURE 4 Structure and fate of lisdexamfetamine. Lisdexamfetamine is a conjugate of d -amphetamine and the amino acid l -lysine, and is converted into its constituents after enzymatic cleavage in the red blood cells. Lisdexamfetamine has emerged as a new drug in the treatment of ADHD due to its more favorable pharmacokinetics and lower abuse liability compared with amphetamine.

<!-- image -->

(Pointdexter,  1960);  thereafter,  several  different  amphetamine derivatives have been widely used for this indication (Ricca et al., 2009). Interestingly, the mechanisms underlying appetite suppression  by  amphetamines  appear  to  differ  from  those  that  mediate psychostimulation.  For  example,  fenfluramine,  which  has  long been used as an appetite suppressant, has a preferential effect on the  serotonergic  system  (Trifunovic  &amp;  Reilly,  2006).  Moreover, several  studies  have  demonstrated  that  amphetamine  stimulates the  synthesis  of  the  cocaine-  and  amphetamine-regulated  transcript,  an  endogenous  peptide  which  has  appetite-suppressant properties  (Stanley  et  al.,  2001).  The  effect  of  amphetamines on  appetite  has  been  consistently  shown  to  promote  significant weight loss in obese patients. However, tolerance to this effect has been described together with weight regain after treatment discontinuation, which limits the efficacy of these drugs in the long term (Ricca et al., 2009). Moreover, the use of amphetamines as appetite  suppressants is plagued by the emergence of severe adverse effects at the level of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. In this regard, it is worth mentioning the epidemic of pulmonary hypertension observed in obese patients under treatment with fenfluramine  (MacLean,  1999).  Notwithstanding  these  limitations, amphetamines are still used for the treatment of obesity, due to both the constantly growing incidence of this disease in Western countries,  and  the  shortage  of  alternative  effective  medications (Ricca  et  al.,  2009).  While  some  amphetamine  derivatives  such as  fenfluramine and sibutramine have been withdrawn from the market, others such as the combination of phentermine/topiramate have  been  introduced  for  the  treatment  of  obesity  (Cosentino, Conrad, &amp; Uwaifo, 2011).

Besides the medical use and the licit use by certain profession, for example, military personnel (Caldwell et al., 2003), amphetamine and its related drugs are widely misused as performance enhancers.  Amphetamine  consumed  for  this  purpose  may  come  from either illegal or legal sources, and major geographical and social differences  in  this  phenomenon  have  been  reported.  Interesting examples of this are the misuse of amphetamine by athletes, truck drivers,  and  college  students,  providing  a  picture  of  the  reasons why amphetamine may be misused, the factors that may underlie this practice, and the risks connected with it.

The misuse of amphetamine and other psychostimulants in sports has  a  long  history,  and  dates  back  to  the  twentieth  century  (Avois et al., 2006). Athletes may take amphetamine due to its central effects, which may increase alertness and produce some attitudinal advantages; for example, athletes engaged in sports that are based on physical contact might want to heighten their aggressive attitude toward their  opponents (Avois et al., 2006). In addition, amphetamine has been used in sports due to its peripheral effects, which may ameliorate performance by increasing cardiac output, and then elevate the amount of blood that  reaches  the  muscles  (Docherty,  2008).  Even though the most recent reports by the World Antidoping Agency have documented the existence of newer substances that can be illicitly used  as  performance  enhancers  (e.g.,  cardiac  stimulants,  synthetic erythropoietin), amphetamine is still part of the array of doping substances currently used in sports (Docherty, 2008).

Truck drivers are another category of people who largely misuse  amphetamine, as indicated  by  several  surveys  performed  in different countries which found a prevalence of this phenomenon ranging from 0.9% to 70% (Girotto, Mesas, de Andrade, &amp; Birolim, 2014; Gustavsen, Mørland, &amp; Bramness, 2006). Interestingly, amphetamine misuse by truck drivers is associated with specific social and economic factors, such as young age, night driving, earning a high salary, and undertaking long trips (Girotto et al., 2014).

Thus, truck drivers are willing to take amphetamine, as its psychostimulant properties may help them to keep up with their work and, in turn, maintain a high salary.

The studies available to date consistently indicate that amphetamine misuse by athletes and truck drivers is a worldwide phenomenon (Docherty, 2008; Girotto et al., 2014). At variance with these data are those of another well-documented form of amphetamine misuse, namely that by college students, which is far more common in the USA than in other countries (Berbatis, Sunderland, &amp; Bulsara, 2002). In this particular case, amphetamine usually comes from medical prescriptions that are diverted to nontherapeutic use, rather than from the illicit market. Therefore, the significant misuse of amphetamine by college students in the USA is due, at least in part, to the higher rates psychostimulant prescriptions for the treatment of ADHD compared with the rest of the world (Berbatis et al., 2002). Surveys carried out in various colleges across the USA have indicated that up to 30% of students engage in the illicit use amphetamine and other psychostimulants that were originally prescribed for ADHD (McCabe &amp; West, 2013). Social factors play a role in this habit, as misuse of amphetamine was found to be more common in those students who had lower grade averages (McCabe &amp; West, 2013). In line with this, college students consume amphetamine and other psychostimulants in the first instance because these substances are able to sustain attention and increase the number of study hours, and are envisioned as an aid to pursue a brilliant academic career (Teter,  McCabe,  LaGrange,  Cranford,  &amp;  Boyd,  2006).  Nevertheless, recreational use of psychostimulants prescribed for ADHD as 'party drugs' has also been observed, although the prevalence of this habit is lower than that reported for the use of the same drugs as performance enhancers (Teter et al., 2006). Different patterns of psychostimulant  misuse  have  been  observed  in  college  students, which include either  the  combined  consumption  of  methylphenidate and amphetamine or the intake of either substance alone (Teter et al., 2006). Interestingly, Teter et al. (2006) reported that college students used Adderall ' … more than other prescription stimulants on their campus due to its availability and lower occurrence of ups and downs,' which is likely due to the long duration of action of this drug (Faraone et al., 2002).

The misuse of amphetamine deserves particular consideration, as this practice may pose serious health risks, and can also serve as a gateway to subsequent abuse of the drug. As mentioned earlier, amphetamine acts as a sympathomimetic drug; hence, it may induce tachycardia and hypertension. Even though these effects are generally well tolerated, they may be lethal under specific conditions (Spiller, Hays, &amp; Aleguas, 2013). For example, the sympathetic stimulation by amphetamine may promote heart failure and/or cerebral hemorrhage in people with preexisting cardiac and circulatory problems. In the case of athletes, it is noteworthy that amphetamine  may  amplify  the  effects  of  physical  activity,  and cause a further increase in both heart rhythm and sweating, which may  become  harmful  (Docherty,  2008).  Moreover,  it  has  to  be considered that the central effects of amphetamine may alter both the perception of stimuli and reaction times, often leading to an overestimation of one's capabilities and increasing the propensity to commit risky actions. This is particularly well exemplified by the higher rate of car accidents recorded among truck drivers who misuse amphetamine (Girotto et al., 2014).

An important feature of amphetamine misuse is that people who engage in this practice often ignore and/or underestimate both the  immediate  and  long-term  risks  that  may  be  associated  with the use of the drug. This has been very well documented by a survey performed to ascertain the reasons college students adduce to justify their misuse of amphetamine and other psychostimulants (DeSantis  &amp;  Curtis  Hane,  2010).  College  students  usually  consider the misuse of amphetamine in the form of Adderall 'mo  rally acceptable,' as it is done to 'get better grades,' and 'not just to get  high.'  Therefore,  students  envision  this  behavior  as  different from the intake of 'party drugs,' such as methamphetamine and MDMA. Moreover, Adderall is regarded as a safe substance, because 'it is produced by the pharmaceutical industry,' and most importantly, is 'given to children.' Finally, the risks related to the misuse  of Adderall  are  often  downplayed  by  the  argument  that both the effects and the legal consequences associated with this practice are somewhat milder than those that may arise from the intake of other licit and illicit substances, such as ethanol, cocaine, or marijuana (DeSantis &amp; Curtis Hane, 2010).

In  order  to  properly  understand  the  significance  of  all  these findings, it is important to mention that several studies have demonstrated how the use of amphetamine in the management of ADHD is almost completely devoid of health risks for the treated children (Merkel  &amp;  Kuchibhatla,  2009).  Side  effects,  when  present,  are generally of mild intensity and may be overcome by altering the drug administration regimen. Furthermore, when used according to standardized therapeutic protocols, Adderall has a negligible abuse liability (Merkel &amp; Kuchibhatla, 2009). Notably, current evidence indicates that patients with ADHD who had received proper pharmacological treatment during their childhood showed no increase in substance abuse later in life, compared with ADHD patients who had  no  access  to  therapy  (Merkel  &amp;  Kuchibhatla,  2009).  Taken together,  these  considerations  may  partly  explain  why  the  risks related to the misuse of amphetamine as a performance enhancer are often neglected or downplayed.

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, amphetamine elicits its pharmacological  effects  by  stimulating  the  release  of  catecholamines from presynaptic terminals at both the central and peripheral  levels.  The  ability  to  elevate  dopamine  concentrations  in  the so-called 'shell' region of the nucleus accumbens, which is located in the ventral striatum, is thought to underlie the abuse properties of this drug (Di Chiara &amp; Imperato, 1988). The release of dopamine in the shell of the nucleus accumbens is considered to be a critical mechanism that is stimulated by natural rewards, and directs the individual's behavior toward the search for further rewarding stimuli (Di Chiara et al., 2004). A crucial point to be considered in this respect is that rewarding stimuli promote a rapid, so-called 'phasic,' release of dopamine, which is in contrast to the slow, or 'tonic,' release of this neurotransmitter observed under physiological conditions (Wanat, Willuhn, Clark, &amp; Phillips, 2009). Importantly, the phasic release of dopamine may also be attained after the administration of drugs with abuse properties, including amphetamine, and this effect is thought to be a key step in mediating the reinforcing  and  abuse  properties  of  drugs  (Grace,  2000).  When used  for  medical  purposes,  amphetamine  is  usually  taken  either by the oral route or in the form of extended-release formulations. These ways of amphetamine administration trigger a tonic increase of dopamine levels in the brain, which is in line with the evidence that amphetamine has a negligible abuse potential when administered for medical purposes and according to standardized therapeutic protocols (Heal, Smith, Gosden, &amp; Nutt, 2013). Furthermore, it

is important to consider that the abuse properties of a drug are also dependent on the ability of the drug to trigger rewarding effects in a narrow time window from its intake. In fact, this may promote a form of associative learning that links the intake of the drug with the  onset  of  its  pleasurable  effects,  and  favors  subsequent  drug intake (Di Chiara et al., 2004). Therefore, the slow pharmacokinetics  that  involves  oral  administration of amphetamine renders the drug less desirable, compared with other routes of administration, and may justify why amphetamine is scarcely addictive when taken orally (Heal et al., 2013). Nevertheless, studies on the misuse of amphetamine as a performance enhancer have shown that a significant percentage of individuals (up to 40%) take amphetamine by nonoral routes, such as snorting and smoking (Teter et al., 2006). Importantly, amphetamine may trigger a phasic release of dopamine when taken in this way (Kirkpatrick et al., 2012). This suggests  that  there  is  a  risk  that  misuse  of  amphetamine  can  result in overt substance abuse, at least in those cases where the drug is taken by nonoral routes.

The addictive properties of amphetamines are well acknowledged, and these drugs have been widely abused since the twentieth century (Iversen, 2008). Reports on drug abuse worldwide indicate that  amphetamines  are  the  second  most  commonly  abused  substances  after  cannabis  (Singleton,  Degenhardt,  Hall,  &amp;  Zabransky, 2009). Interestingly, the abuse of amphetamines is characterized by  geographical  differences,  with  a  marked  prevalence  in  the

Pacific and East Asia areas, although other regions, such as the Middle East and Eastern Europe, are increasingly being interested in this phenomenon (Singleton et al., 2009). Defining the abuse of  amphetamines is a complex issue, with regard to the type of drugs involved and their sources, habit prevalence, and factors that promote  it.  Epidemiological  studies  usually  report  the  cumulative prevalence of the abuse of amphetamines and, when specific drugs are considered, the focus is often on methamphetamine and MDMA. Even though empirical evidence indicates that amphetamine is also abused, no exhaustive data exist on the prevalence of  this  habit.  In  this  regard,  it  is,  however,  noteworthy  that  the so-called 'amphetamine epidemics' have usually involved methamphetamine, and that amphetamine has been historically abused at lower rates than methamphetamine has (Iversen, 2008). These findings could be explained in light of the fact that the effects of amphetamine are somewhat different from those elicited by other commonly  abused  amphetamine-related  drugs.  For  example, amphetamine does not elicit the pleasurable social effects that can be observed after the intake of MDMA, and which contribute to driving the consumption of this drug, but rather it can induce psychosis,  particularly  when  it  is  taken  over  a  long  period  of  time (Cruickshank &amp; Dyer, 2009). Moreover, data collected in experimental animals indicate that  the  effects  of  amphetamine  do  not overlap those of methamphetamine with regard to stimulation of dopamine release in specific brain regions (Figure 5). While both

FIGURE 5 Effects of amphetamine and methamphetamine on the brain with regard to their abuse potential. Both amphetamine (A) and methamphetamine (B) stimulate dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens 'shell' and the prefrontal cortex, but amphetamine elicits a stronger effect than methamphetamine in the latter brain region. Moreover, amphetamine, but not methamphetamine, elevates the levels of glutamate in the nucleus accumbens. Taken together, these effects would promote sort of a negative feedback, which would eventually self-limit the abuse properties of amphetamine (A).

<!-- image -->

these  drugs  elevate  dopamine  levels  in  the  shell  of  the  nucleus accumbens, amphetamine is significantly more potent than methamphetamine  in  stimulating  dopamine  release  in  the  prefrontal cortex (Shoblock et al., 2003). It has been suggested that dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex could act to counteract the effects  of  heightened  levels  of  dopamine  in  the  nucleus  accumbens (Shoblock et al., 2003). In line with this, amphetamine could be able to self-limit its rewarding effects, and this would render the drug less prone to engender an abuse habit (Iversen, 2008). It is also noteworthy that amphetamine, but not methamphetamine, promotes  the  release  of  glutamate  in  the  nucleus  accumbens (Shoblock et al., 2003), which has been suggested to inhibit the mechanisms of reward (Carlezon &amp; Wise, 1996).

Another interesting point to take into account with regard to the abuse of amphetamine is the consumer's attitude toward the drug. People who are addicted to amphetamines and rely on the illegal market to get their drugs are more interested in those substances that are able to produce a state of 'high' or 'rush,' which is one of the effects that drives the addiction to these substances (Iversen,  2008).  Methamphetamine  is  by  far  the  most  potent amphetamine-related  drug  in  eliciting  these  effects,  which  is  in line with the high prevalence of its abuse. Moreover, addicts usually  take  amphetamines  by  nonoral  routes,  such  as  intravenous injection,  snorting,  or  smoking  which,  as  mentioned  earlier,  are the  routes  that  are  associated  with  stronger  pleasurable  effects of amphetamine-related drugs. As for amphetamine, it is important to remark that people who take this drug, either for medical reasons or as a performance enhancer, usually take it by the oral route (Iversen, 2008). By resulting in an attenuation of pleasurable effects (Heal et al., 2013), this may significantly contribute to reduce the likelihood of developing a real dependence toward amphetamine. Notably, this is also in line with the fact that the majority  of  people  who  take  amphetamine  manage  to  take  the drug  'on  demand'  (e.g.,  while  studying  or  engaging  in  work) without ending up in an overt substance dependence. Currently, the diversion of amphetamine prescriptions to nonoral routes of administration  is  being  greatly  limited  by  the  development  of extended-release  preparations,  which  makes  tampering  with  the drug for nonmedical use more difficult. Nevertheless, the possibility  that  amphetamine may be taken by nonoral routes of administration exists, and has to be carefully considered, not only with regard to the threatening effects of the drug itself, but also because it may be part of a polydrug use, hence influencing the effects and addictive properties of other substances.

## Applications to Other Addictions and Substance Misuse

Based on the current theories that entail a pivotal role for mesolimbic dopamine in drug addiction, the ability of amphetamine to promote dopamine release in the ventral striatum acquires particular  relevance,  as  this  effect  might  prime  the  brain  to  the  addictive effects of other substances that are able to stimulate dopamine transmission in the same area (Figure 6). Evidence collected in experimental  animals  substantiates  this  view  by  showing  that amphetamine  can  amplify  the  intake  of  cocaine  and  ethanol  in self-administration paradigms (Potthoff, Ellison, &amp; Nelson, 1983; Valadez &amp; Schenk, 1994). Similar findings have been obtained in humans, where amphetamine has been demonstrated to increase both  cigarette  smoking  and  the  reinforcing  effects  of  nicotine (Cousins,  Stamat,  &amp;  de  Wit,  2001;  Tidey,  O'Neill,  &amp;  Higgins, 2000). It is noteworthy that some studies have demonstrated how the  subjective  effects  of  amphetamine  are  increased  in  ethanol drinkers, suggesting the risk of a comorbid consumption of these substances (Stoops, Fillmore, Poonacha, Kingery, &amp; Rush, 2003).

At variance with these findings, studies in rodent and primate models  of  drug  self-administration  have  indicated  that  amphetamine  may  actually  reduce  the  reinforcing  effects  of  cocaine (Chiodo  &amp;  Roberts,  2009;  Czoty,  Gould,  Martelle,  &amp;  Nader, 2011).  Interestingly,  similar  effects  of  amphetamine  have  also been reported in humans. Thus, acute pretreatment with amphetamine has been found not to increase the self-administration of the substance by individuals not dependent on the drug (Stoops, Vansickel,  Lile,  &amp;  Rush,  2007).  Moreover,  studies  in  psychostimulant-dependent people have shown that chronic substitution treatment with amphetamine can be useful for the management of  cocaine  and  methamphetamine dependence (Galloway et al., 2011;  Greenwald,  Lundahl,  &amp;  Steinmiller,  2010;  Rush,  Stoops, Lile, Glaser, &amp; Hays, 2011). The latter data seem to suggest that amphetamine would not pose a risk for the development and/or exacerbation of dependence for other drugs, but would actually reduce it. However, two important points have to be considered with regard to these studies. First, experimental evaluation of the effects of amphetamine in humans is usually performed by administering  the  drug  orally  and/or  by  employing  extended-release formulations. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, these modes of  administration  are  characterized  by  slow  pharmacokinetics, and are less likely to cause drug abuse than the routes of administration usually preferred by amphetamine-dependent individuals (e.g., intravenous injection, snorting). In this light, it is worth mentioning that a study has shown that d -amphetamine exerts a profile of effects similar to that of methamphetamine, when the drug is taken by the intranasal route of administration (Kirkpatrick et al., 2012). Second, the effects of amphetamine observed in individuals  formerly  dependent  on  other  psychostimulants  may  not completely overlap those that the drug elicits in psychostimulantnaïve  individuals.  For  example,  it  is  feasible  that  amphetamine prevents relapse in methamphetamine-dependent individuals simply by attenuating withdrawal symptoms, rather than by acting on the  neuronal circuits  involved in methamphetamine dependence (Galloway et al., 2011). Therefore, notwithstanding these encouraging  effects  of  amphetamine  substitution  therapy,  it  should  be kept  in  mind  that  amphetamine  does  have  abuse  potential,  and its  improper  use  may  end  in  drug  dependence.  Hence,  the  use of  amphetamine  has  to  be  strictly  limited  to  medical  purposes according to precise therapeutic protocols.

Another potential risk related to the nonmedical use of amphetamine  involves  the  neurotoxic  potential  of  this  drug,  as  independent  preclinical  studies  have  consistently  demonstrated  that amphetamine  induces  neurotoxicity  (Fuller  &amp;  Hemrick-Luecke, 1980;  Jonsson  &amp;  Nwanze,  1982).  Remarkably,  epidemiological  studies  have  shown  a  higher  incidence  of  Parkinson's  disease,  a  neurodegenerative  pathological  condition,  in  people  who abused amphetamines early in life than in the general population (Garwood, Bekele, McCulloch, &amp; Christine, 2006), which would suggest a causal link between this drug and neurodegeneration. As of  today,  no  exhaustive  follow-up  data  on  the  neurotoxic  effects

|

2

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 6 Possible influence of amphetamine on the dependence on other psychoactive drugs. Amphetamine has been demonstrated to amplify the effects of certain drugs of abuse in both experimental animals and humans. However, amphetamine has also been shown to attenuate the effects of other drugs of abuse, particularly in people dependent on other psychostimulants. These drug-drug interactions may have significant implications for the ability of amphetamine to influence the development of dependence toward other substances.

of amphetamine taken for either medical or nonmedical purposes are  available.  However,  the  neurotoxic  potential  of  amphetamine should be considered besides its abuse potential, as it may pose a health risk, particularly in those cases when the drug is taken at high doses for recreational purposes and/or in combination with other substances that may be toxic to the brain.

## DEFINITION OF TERMS

Abuse liability It  is  the  propensity  of  a  drug  to  induce  dependence. Abuse liability is high for those drugs (e.g., opiates) that are highly addictive  and  the  intake  of  which  has  a  significant  detrimental impact on the social and productive life of an individual.

Amphetamine epidemics It is the widespread occurrence of amphetamine-related  drug  abuse  in  specific  geographical  regions  at  a particular time.

Executive functions They are integrated functions that regulate attention,  cognition,  flexibility,  and  task  solving.  The  prefrontal cortical  regions  have  a  crucial  role  in  regulating  these  functions. Amphetamine can influence executive functions by acting on the prefrontal cortex.

Extended-release formulation It is a pharmaceutical formulation that releases a predetermined amount of a drug over a long period of time. These types of formulations are particularly suitable for longterm therapy, and to improve the patient's compliance, as use of them reduces the number of drug administrations.

Gateway hypothesis It is the theory that postulates how the preexposure to one drug may amplify the effects of either the same drug or other drugs taken at a later time.

'High' or 'rush' This describes the state characterized by an intense psychostimulation often associated with altered sensorial perception and hallucinations. This state is attained when amphetamines are administered by fast delivery routes (e.g., intravenously), and is considered to be one of the causes underlying amphetamine dependence.

Nucleus accumbens 'shell' It is a region of the ventral striatum that plays a crucial role in reward and gratification. The nucleus accumbens 'shell' is considered to be a key region in drug dependence, as all addictive drugs share the ability to increase the extracellular dopamine levels in this region.

Party  drug It  is  a  drug  that  is  consumed  for  nonmedical  purposes, mainly due to its pleasurable effects. Party drugs include substances

of different pharmacological classes (e.g., psychostimulants, ethanol), and are often consumed in a social context, such as parties or raves.

- Polydrug use It describes the simultaneous use of two or more psychoactive substances. Polydrug use may be observed in dependent individuals, and is often carried out to amplify the pleasurable effects of drugs.
- Self-administration It is a procedure that consists of the autonomous administration  of  drugs  by  humans,  or  by  experimental  animals, according to specific schedules. The procedure in animals is used to study drug dependence at the preclinical level.
- Stereotyped behavior Repetitive behavior characterized by the execution of purposeless movements. This behavior is typically observed in experimental animals treated with dopaminergic drugs, but may be also displayed by human amphetamine addicts who take the drug at high doses or for a long time.

## KEY FACTS

## Key Facts of ADHD

- Attention is the behavioral process that allows one to focus on specific stimuli, while ignoring others present at the same time.
- Attention is critical for the execution of a wide range of everyday tasks and for goal-oriented behaviors.
- ADHD is one of the major disorders that feature a reduced attention,  though  it  may  also  be  associated  with  symptoms such as hyperactivity and impulsivity.
- Based on the spectrum of symptoms presented, ADHD can be classified as inattentive type, hyperactive-impulsive type, and combined type (both inattentive and hyperactive).
- It is estimated that about the 5-7% of children and adolescent worldwide may suffer, or have suffered, ADHD.
- ADHD becomes evident at preschool age, and may persist in later life, if not treated.
- ADHD may have high costs for the health systems, due to the need of pharmacological treatment and supportive measures.
- A deficient dopaminergic transmission in the prefrontal cortex is thought to be one of the mechanisms that underlie ADHD.
- Amphetamine  is  a  first  choice  drug  in  the  management  of ADHD, due to its ability to elevate dopamine levels in the prefrontal cortex, hence counteracting this deficit.

## Key Facts of Dopamine

- Dopamine is a catecholaminergic neuromodulator present at both the central and peripheral level.
- Dopamine  critically  regulates  important  physiological  functions, including attention, goal-oriented behavior, and movement.
- There  are  three  major  dopaminergic  circuits  in  the  brain: mesocortical, mesolimbic, and nigrostriatal.
- Perturbations  in  the  brain  levels  of  dopamine  are  associated with neurological and/or psychiatric diseases.
- Examples of these diseases are Parkinson's disease, caused by a hypofunction of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic circuit, and psychosis, caused by a hyperfunction of the mesolimbic dopaminergic circuit.
- Dopamine is also crucial for drug abuse, as all addictive drugs increase  the  levels  of  this  neuromodulator  in  the  nucleus accumbens 'shell' region.
- Amphetamine may release dopamine from presynaptic terminals; hence, dopamine is a key player in both the peripheral and central effects of amphetamine

## SUMMARY POINTS

- This  chapter  summarizes  the  main  aspects  of  amphetamine use, misuse, and abuse.
- The  medical  uses  of  amphetamine  are  presented,  discussing both the therapeutic and side effects of amphetamine.
- The  misuse  of  the  drug  is  discussed  with  reference  to  the underlying  factors,  and  to  both  the  social  and  geographical differences of this habit.
- Attention is dedicated to the misuse of amphetamine by college students, which is increasingly emerging as a major concern.
- The  risks  related  to  the  misuse  of  amphetamine  in  terms  of toxic effect and the development of dependence are presented, and the misconception of these risks is discussed.
- Finally, the chapter reviews the possible interactions between amphetamine and other substances of abuse, together with the risks related to the neurotoxic potential of amphetamine.

## REFERENCES

- American  Psychiatric  Association.  (2013). Diagnostic  and  statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing.
- Arnsten, A. F., &amp; Pliszka, S. R. (2011). Catecholamine influences on prefrontal  cortical  function:  relevance  to  treatment  of  attention  deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and related disorders. Pharmacology Bioche­ mistry and Behavior , 99 , 211-216.
- Avois, L., Robinson, N., Saudan, C., Baume, N., Mangin, P., &amp; Saugy, M. (2006). Central nervous system stimulants and sport practice. British Journal of Sports Medicine , 40 (Suppl. 1), i16-i20.
- Berbatis, C. G., Sunderland, V . B., &amp; Bulsara, M. (2002). Licit psychostimulant consumption in Australia, 1984-2000: international and jurisdictional comparison. Medical Journal of Australia , 177 , 539-543.
- Brodie, B. B., Cho, A. K., Stefano, F. J., &amp; Gessa, G. L. (1969). On mechanisms of norepinephrine release by amphetamine and tyramine and tolerance to their effects. Advances in Biochemical Psychopharmacology , 1 , 219-238.
- Caldwell,  J. A.,  Caldwell,  J.  L.,  &amp;  Darlington,  K.  K.  (2003).  Utility of  dextroamphetamine  for  attenuating  the  impact  of  sleep  deprivation in pilots. Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine , 74 , 1125-1134.
- Calello,  D.  P.,  &amp;  Osterhoudt,  K.  C.  (2004). Acute  psychosis  associated with therapeutic use of dextroamphetamine. Pediatrics , 113 , 1466.
- Carlezon, W. A., Jr., &amp; Wise, R. A. (1996). Rewarding actions of phencyclidine  and  related  drugs  in  nucleus  accumbens  shell  and  frontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 16 , 3112-3122.
- Carvalho, M., Carmo, H., Costa, V. M., Capela, J. P., Pontes, H., Remião, F.,    …  Bastos,  M.  L.  (2012).  T oxicity  of  amphetamines: an update. Archives of Toxicology , 86 , 1167-1231.

- Chiodo, K. A., &amp; Roberts, D. C. (2009). Decreased reinforcing effects of cocaine following 2 weeks of continuous d -amphetamine treatment in rats. Psychopharmacology , 206 , 447-456.
- Cosentino, G., Conrad, A. O., &amp; Uwaifo, G. I. (2011). Phentermine and topiramate  for  the  management  of  obesity:  a  review. Drug  Design Development and Therapy , 7 , 267-278.
- Cousins,  M.  S.,  Stamat,  H.  M.,  &amp;  de  Wit,  H.  (2001).  Acute  doses  of d -amphetamine  and  bupropion  increase  cigarette  smoking. Psycho­ pharmacology , 157 , 243-253.
- Cruickshank, C. C., &amp; Dyer, K. R. (2009). A review of the clinical pharmacology of methamphetamine. Addiction , 104 , 1085-1099.
- Czoty, P. W., Gould, R. W., Martelle, J. L., &amp; Nader, M. A. (2011). Prolonged attenuation of the reinforcing strength of cocaine by chronic d -amphetamine in rhesus monkeys. Neuropsychopharmacology , 36 , 539-547.
- DeSantis, A. D., &amp; Curtis Hane, A. (2010). 'Adderall is definitely not a drug': justifications for the illegal use of ADHD stimulants. Substance Use and Misuse , 45 , 31-46.
- Di Chiara,  G.,  Bassareo, V .,  Fenu,  S.,  De  Luca,  M. A.,  Spina,  L.,  Cadoni, C.,  … Lecca, D. (2004). Dopamine and drug addiction: the nucleus accumbens  shell  connection. Neuropharmacology , 47 (Suppl.  1), 227-241.
- Di Chiara, G., &amp; Imperato, A. (1988). Drugs abused by humans preferentially  increase  synaptic  dopamine  concentrations  in  the  mesolimbic system of freely moving rats. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 85 , 5274-5278.
- Docherty, J. R. (2008). Pharmacology of stimulants prohibited by the World Anti-Doping  Agency  (WADA). British  Journal  of  Pharmacology , 154 , 606-622.
- Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., &amp; Roe, C. (2002). Comparative efficacy of Adderall  and  methylphenidate  in  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder: a meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology , 22 , 468-473.
- Fuller,  R.  W.,  &amp;  Hemrick-Luecke,  S.  (1980).  Long-lasting  depletion  of striatal dopamine by a single injection of amphetamine in iprindoletreated rats. Science , 209 , 305-307.
- Galloway, G. P., Buscemi, R., Coyle, J. R., Flower, K., Siegrist, J. D., Fiske, L. A.,    …  Mendelson,  J.  (2011). A  randomized,  placebo-controlled trial  of  sustained-release  dextroamphetamine  for  treatment  of  methamphetamine addiction. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics , 89 , 276-282.
- Garwood, E. R., Bekele, W., McCulloch, C. E., &amp; Christine, C. W. (2006). Amphetamine exposure is elevated in Parkinson's disease. Neurotoxi­ cology , 27 , 1003-1006.
- Girotto, E., Mesas, A. E., de Andrade, S. M., &amp; Birolim, M. M. (2014). Psychoactive  substance  use  by  truck  drivers:  a  systematic  review. Occupational and Environmental Medicine , 71 , 71-76.
- Grace, A. A. (2000). The tonic/phasic model of dopamine system regulation and its implications for understanding alcohol and psychostimulant craving. Addiction , 95 (Suppl. 2), S119-S128.
- Grcevich, S., Rowane, W. A., Marcellino, B., &amp; Sullivan-Hurst, S. (2001). Retrospective  comparison  of  Adderall  and  methylphenidate  in  the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology , 11 , 35-41.
- Greenwald, M. K., Lundahl, L. H., &amp; Steinmiller, C. L. (2010). Sustained release d -amphetamine reduces cocaine but not 'speedball'-seeking in buprenorphine-maintained volunteers: a test of dual-agonist pharmacotherapy for cocaine/heroin polydrug abusers. Neuropsychopharma­ cology , 35 , 2624-2637.
- Gustavsen, I., Mørland, J., &amp; Bramness, J. G. (2006). Impairment related to blood amphetamine and/or methamphetamine concentrations in suspected drugged drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention , 38 , 490-495.
- Heal, D. J., Smith, S. L., Gosden, J., &amp; Nutt, D. J. (2013). Amphetamine, past and present-a pharmacological and clinical perspective. Journal of Psychopharmacology , 27 , 479-496.
- Iversen, L. (2008). Speed, ecstasy, ritalin. The science of amphetamines . Oxford: University Press.
- Jonsson, G., &amp; Nwanze, E. (1982). Selective (+)-amphetamine neurotoxicity on striatal dopamine nerve terminals in the mouse. British Journal of Pharmacology , 77 , 335-345.
- Kirkpatrick, M. G., Gunderson, E. W., Johanson, C. E., Levin, F. R., Foltin, R. W., &amp; Hart, C. L. (2012). Comparison of intranasal methamphetamine and d -amphetamine self-administration by humans. Addiction , 107 , 783-791.
- Koob, G. F., &amp; Nestler, E. J. (1997). The neurobiology of drug addiction. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience , 9 , 482-497.
- MacLean, M. R. (1999). Pulmonary hypertension, anorexigens and 5-HT: pharmacological synergism in action? Trends in Pharmacological Sci­ ences , 20 , 490-495.
- McCabe, S. E., &amp; West, B. T. (2013). Medical and nonmedical use of prescription stimulants: results from a national multicohort study. Jour­ nal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 52 , 1272-1280.
- Merkel, R. L., Jr., &amp; Kuchibhatla, A. (2009). Safety of stimulant treatment in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Part I. Expert Opinion on Drug Safety , 8 , 655-668.
- Miller, E. K., &amp; Buschman, T. J. (2013). Cortical circuits for the control of attention. Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 23 , 216-222.
- Nelson, L. R., &amp; Ellison, G. (1978). Enhanced stereotypies after repeated injections but not continuous amphetamines. Neuropharmacology , 17 , 1081-1084.
- Pennick, M. (2010). Absorption of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate and its enzymatic  conversion  to d -amphetamine. Neuropsychiatric  Disease and Treatment , 6 , 317-327.
- Pointdexter, A. (1960). Appetite suppressant drugs: a controlled clinical comparison of benzphetamine, phenmetrazine, d -amphetamine and placebo. Current Therapeutic Research Clinical and Experimental , 2 , 354-363.
- Potthoff, A. D., Ellison, G., &amp; Nelson, L. (1983). Ethanol intake increases during  continuous  administration  of  amphetamine  and  nicotine,  but not  several  other  drugs. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior , 18 , 489-493.
- Reddy, D. S. (2013). Current pharmacotherapy of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Drugs of Today , 49 , 647-665.
- Ricca, V., Castellini, G., Mannucci, E., Monami, M., Ravaldi, C., Gorini Amedei, S.,  … Faravelli, C. (2009). Amphetamine derivatives and obesity. Appetite , 52 , 405-409.
- Rush, C. R., Stoops, W. W., Lile, J. A., Glaser, P. E., &amp; Hays, L. R. (2011). Subjective and physiological effects of acute intranasal methamphetamine during d -amphetamine maintenance. Psychopharmacology , 214 , 665-674.
- Servan-Schreiber, D., Carter, C. S., Bruno, R. M., &amp; Cohen, J. D. (1998). Dopamine and the mechanisms of cognition: Part II. d -amphetamine effects in human subjects performing a selective attention task. Bio­ logical Psychiatry , 43 , 723-729.
- Shoblock,  J.  R.,  Sullivan,  E.  B.,  Maisonneuve,  I.  M.,  &amp;  Glick,  S. D.  (2003).  Neurochemical  and  behavioral  differences  between d -methamphetamine  and d -amphetamine  in  rats. Psychopharma­ cology , 165 , 359-369.

- Singleton, J., Degenhardt, L., Hall, W., &amp; Zabransky, T. (2009). Mortality among  amphetamine  users:  a  systematic  review  of  cohort  studies. Drug and Alcohol Dependence , 105 , 1-8.
- Soutullo, C., Banaschewski, T., Lecendreux, M., Johnson, M., Zuddas, A., Anderson, C.,  … Coghill, D. R. (2013). A post hoc comparison of the effects of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate and osmotic-release oral system methylphenidate on symptoms of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. CNS Drugs , 27 , 743-751.
- Spiller, H. A., Hays, H. L., &amp; Aleguas, A., Jr. (2013). Overdose of drugs for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: clinical presentation, mechanisms of toxicity, and management. CNS Drugs , 27 , 531-543.
- Staller, J., &amp; Faraone, S. V . (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in girls: epidemiology and management. CNS Drugs , 20 , 107-123.
- Stanley, S. A., Small, C. J., Murphy, K. G., Rayes, E., Abbott, C. R., Seal, L. J.,  … Bloom, S. R. (2001). Actions of cocaine- and amphetamineregulated  transcript  (CART)  peptide  on  regulation  of  appetite  and hypothalamo-pituitary axes in vitro  and  in  vivo  in  male  rats. Brain Research , 893 , 186-194.
- Stoops, W. W., Fillmore, M. T., Poonacha, M. S., Kingery, J. E., &amp; Rush, C.  R.  (2003). Alcohol  choice  and  amphetamine  effects  in  light  and moderate drinkers. Alcohol Clinical and Experimental Research , 27 , 804-811.
- Stoops, W. W., Vansickel, A. R., Lile, J. A., &amp; Rush, C. R. (2007). Acute d -amphetamine pretreatment does not alter stimulant self-administration in humans. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior , 87 , 20-29.
- Strömberg, U., &amp; Svensson, T. H. (1975). Differences between (+)- and (-)-amphetamine in effects on locomotor activity and l -dopa potentiating action in mice. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Archives of Pharmaco­ logy , 287 , 171-179.
- Taylor, K. M., &amp; Snyder, S. H. (1970). Amphetamine: differentiation by d and l isomers of behavior involving brain norepinephrine or dopamine. Science , 168 , 1487-1489.
- Teter, C. J., McCabe, S. E., LaGrange, K., Cranford, J. A., &amp; Boyd, C. J. (2006).  Illicit  use  of  specific  prescription  stimulants  among  college students: prevalence, motives, and routes of administration. Pharma­ cotherapy , 26 , 1501-1510.
- Tidey,  J.  W.,  O'Neill,  S.  C.,  &amp;  Higgins,  S.  T.  (2000). d -amphetamine increases choice of cigarette smoking over monetary reinforcement. Psychopharmacology , 153 , 85-92.
- Trifunovic, R., &amp; Reilly, S. (2006). Medial parabrachial nucleus neurons modulate d -fenfluramine-induced anorexia through 5HT2C receptors. Brain Research , 1067 , 170-176.
- Valadez, A., &amp; Schenk, S. (1994). Persistence of the ability of amphetamine preexposure  to  facilitate  acquisition  of  cocaine  self-administration. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior , 47 , 203-205.
- Wanat, M. J., Willuhn, I., Clark, J. J., &amp; Phillips, P. E. (2009). Phasic dopamine release in appetitive behaviors and drug addiction. Current Drug Abuse Reviews , 2 , 195-213.