## Self-efficacy: Toward  a  Unifying Theory  of  Behavioral  Change

## Albert Bandura Stanford University

The  present  article  presents  an  integrative theoretical  framework to explain and  to  predict  psychological  changes  achieved  by  different  modes  of  treatment. This  theory  states  that  psychological procedures,  whatever  their  form,  alter  the level  and  strength  of self-efficacy. It is  hypothesized  that  expectations  of  personal  efficacy determine  whether  coping  behavior  will  be  initiated,  how  much effort will  be  expended,  and  how  long  it will  be  sustained  in  the face of  obstacles  and  aversive  experiences.  Persistence  in  activities  that  are  subjectively threatening  but  in  fact  relatively  safe  produces,  through  experiences  of  mastery, further  enhancement  of  self-efficacy  and  corresponding reductions in  defensive behavior.  In  the  proposed  model,  expectations  of  personal  efficacy  are  derived from four principal sources of information:  performance  accomplishments, vicarious  experience,  verbal  persuasion,  and  physiological  states.  The  more  dependable  the  experiential  sources, the  greater  are  the  changes in  perceived  selfefficacy.  A number of  factors  are  identified as  influencing  the  cognitive processing of  efficacy  information arising  from  enactive,  vicarious, exhortative,  and  emotive sources.  The  differential  power  of  diverse  therapeutic  procedures  is  analyzed  in terms  of  the  postulated  cognitive mechanism  of  operation.  Findings  are  reported from  microanalyses of  enactive, vicarious, and  emotive  modes  of  treatment  that support the  hypothesized  relationship  between  perceived self-efficacy and  behavioral  changes.  Possible  directions for  further  research  are discussed.

Current  developments in  the  field  of  behavioral  change  reflect  two  major  divergent trends.  The  difference  is  especially  evident  in the treatment of dysfunctional inhibitions and  defensive  behavior.  On  the  one hand,  the mechanisms by which human behavior is acquired  and  regulated  are  increasingly  formulated  in  terms  of  cognitive  processes.  On the  other  hand,  it  is  performance-based  procedures  that  are  proving  to  be most  powerful for  effecting  psychological  changes.  As  a  consequence,  successful  performance is  replacing symbolically based experiences  as  the  principle  vehicle  of  change.

The  present  article  presents  the  view  that changes  achieved  by  different  methods  derive from a  common  cognitive  mechanism.  The

The  research by  the  author  reported  in  this  article was  supported  by  Research  Grant  M-5162  from the National  Institutes  of  Health,  United States Public Health  Service.

Requests for reprints should be sent to Albert Bandura,  Department  of  Psychology,  Stanford University,  Stanford, California  94305.

apparent divergence  of  theory  and practice can  be  reconciled  by  postulating  that  cognitive  processes  mediate  change  but  that  cognitive  events  are  induced  and  altered  most readily  by  experience of  mastery  arising  from effective performance.  The distinction between  process  and  means  is  underscored, because  it  is  often  assumed  that  a  cognitive mode  of operation  requires  a symbolic means of induction.  Psychological changes can be produced through other means than performance accomplishments. Therefore, the explanatory mechanism developed in this article  is  designed  to  account  for  changes  in behavior resulting from diverse modes of treatment.

## Cognitive  Locus  of  Operation

Psychological  treatments  based  on learning principles were  originally conceptualized to operate  through  peripheral  mechanisms.  New behavior was  presumably shaped automatically by its effects. Contingency learning through  paired  stimulation  was  construed  in

connectionist  terms  as  a  process  in  which  responses were  linked  directly to  stimuli.  Altering  the  rate  of  preexisting  behavior  by  reinforcement was portrayed as a process wherein responses were regulated by their immediate consequences without requiring any  conscious involvement  of  the  responders.

Growing  evidence  from  several  lines  of  research  altered  theoretical  perspectives on how behavior is  acquired  and regulated.  Theoretical formulations  emphasizing peripheral mechanisms  began  to  give way  to cognitively oriented  theories  that  explained  behavior  in terms  of  central  processing  of  direct,  vicarious, and symbolic sources of  information. Detailed analysis  of  the  empirical  and  conceptual issues (see Bandura, 1977) falls beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  article.  To summarize  briefly,  however,  it  has  now  been amply  documented that cognitive processes play  a  prominent  role  in  the  acquisition  and retention of new behavior patterns.  Transitory experiences leave lasting effects by being coded  and  retained in  symbols  for  memory representation. Because acquisition of response  information  is a  major  aspect  of learning, much human behavior is developed through modeling. From observing others, one forms  a  conception of how new  behavior  patterns  are  performed,  and  on  later  occasions the  symbolic  construction  serves  as  a  guide for  action (Bandura,  1971).  The  initial  approximations of response patterns learned observationally are further refined through self-corrective  adjustments  based  on  informative  feedback  from  performance.

Learning from response consequences is also conceived of largely as a cognitive process.  Consequences  serve  as  an  unarticulated  way  of  informing  performers what  they must  do  to  gain  beneficial  outcomes  and to avoid  punishing  ones.  By  observing  the  differential effects of their own  actions, individuals discern  which responses are appropriate in  which  settings  and behave  accordingly  (Dulany, 1968).  Viewed  from the cognitive framework,  learning from differential  outcomes  becomes  a special case  of observational  learning.  In  this  mode  of  conveying  response  information,  the  conception of  the  appropriate  behavior  is  gradually  con- structed from  observing  the effects of  one's actions  rather than from the  examples  provided  by  others.

Changes  in  behavior  produced by stimuli that  either  signify  events  to  come or  indicate probable response consequences also have been  shown  to  rely  heavily  on cognitive  representations  of  contingencies.  People  are  not much  affected by  paired  stimulation unless they  recognize that  the  events  are  correlated (Dawson &amp;  Furedy, 1976; Grings,  1973). Stimuli influence the likelihood of a behavior's  being  performed by  virtue  of  their predictive  function, not  because  the  stimuli are  automatically connected  to  responses  by their  having  occurred  together.  Reinterpretation  of antecedent  determinants as predictive cues,  rather  than  as  controlling  stimuli,  has shifted the locus of the regulation of behavior  from  the  stimulus  to the  individual.

The  issue  of  the  locus  at  which  behavioral determinants operate applies to reinforcement  influences  as  well  as  to  antecedent  environmental stimuli.  Contrary  to  the  common view  that  behavior is  controlled  by  its  immediate  consequences,  behavior  is  related  to its  outcomes  at the  level  of  aggregate  consequences rather than momentary effects (Baum,  1973).  People  process  and  synthesize feedback information from sequences of events  over long  intervals  about the  situational circumstances and the  patterns  and rates of actions  that  are  necessary  to  produce given  outcomes.  Since consequences  affect  behavior  through  the  influence  of  thought,  beliefs about schedules of reinforcement can exert  greater  influence on  behavior than  the reinforcement itself (Baron, Kaufman,  &amp; Stauber, 1969; Kaufman,  Baron,  &amp;  Kopp, 1966).  Incidence  of  behavior  that  has  been positively  reinforced  does  not  increase  if  individuals  believe,  based  on  other  information, that  the  same  actions  will  not  be  rewarded on  future  occasions (Estes,  1972);  and  the same  consequences  can  increase,  reduce,  or have  no  effect on  incidence  of  behavior depending  on  whether individuals  are led to believe  that  the  consequences  signify  correct responses,  incorrect  responses,  or  occur  noncontingently  (Dulany,  1968).

The  discussion  thus  far  has  examined  the

role of cognition in the acquisition and regulation  of  behavior.  Motivation,  which  is primarily  concerned  with  activation  and  persistence  of  behavior,  is  also  partly  rooted  in cognitive  activities. The  capacity to represent  future  consequences  in  thought  provides one  cognitively  based source  of motivation. Through cognitive representation of future outcomes  individuals  can  generate  current  motivators of behavior. Seen from this perspective,  reinforcement operations  affect behavior  largely  by  creating  expectations  that behaving in a certain way will produce anticipated benefits or avert future difficulties (Bolles, 1972b). In the enhancement  of previously  learned  behavior,  reinforcement  is conceived  of  mainly  as  a motivational device  rather than  as  an  automatic  response strengthener.

A  second  cognitively  based  source  of  motivation  operates  through  the  intervening influences  of goal  setting  and self-evaluative reactions (Bandura, 1976b, 1977). Selfmotivation  involves  standards  against  which to evaluate performance. By making selfrewarding reactions conditional on attaining a certain  level  of  behavior,  individuals  create self-inducements to persist in their efforts until their performances match self-prescribed standards. Perceived negative discrepancies between  performance  and standards create dissatisfactions that motivate corrective changes in behavior. Both the anticipated satisfactions  of  desired  accomplishments  and the negative appraisals of insufficient performance  thus  provide  incentives  for  action. Having  accomplished  a  given  level  of  performance, individuals  often are no longer satisfied  with  it  and  make  further  self-reward contingent  on  higher  attainments.

The reconceptualization of  human  learning and motivation in terms of  cognitive processes has major implications for the mechanisms  through  which  therapeutic  procedures alter behavioral functioning. Although  the  advances  in  cognitive  psychology are  a  subject  of  increasing  interest  in  speculations about behavioral change processes, few  new theories of  psychotherapy  have been proposed that  might  prove  useful in  stimulating research on  explanatory mechanisms

Figure  1. Diagrammatic  representation  of  the difference  between  efficacy expectations  and  outcome  expectations.

<!-- image -->

and  in  integrating  the  results  accompanying diverse modes  of treatment. The present article outlines  a theoretical framework,  in which  the  concept  of self-efficacy is  assigned a  central  role,  for analyzing changes achieved in fearful and avoidant behavior.  The  explanatory value  of this conceptual system is  then evaluated  by  its  ability to  predict behavioral changes produced through different  methods  of  treatment.

## Efficacy Expectations  as  a  Mechanism  of Operation

The  present  theory  is  based  on  the  principal asssumption that psychological procedures,  whatever  their  form,  serve  as  means of creating  and strengthening expectations of personal efficacy. Within this analysis, efficacy expectations are distinguished from response-outcome expectancies. The difference  is  presented  schematically  in  Figure  1.

An  outcome  expectancy is defined as a person's  estimate  that  a  given  behavior  will lead to certain  outcomes.  An efficacy expectation is the conviction that one can successfully  execute the  behavior  required  to produce  the  outcomes. Outcome  and efficacy expectations are differentiated, because individuals  can  believe  that  a  particular  course of  action  will  produce  certain  outcomes,  but if  they entertain serious doubts about whether they can perform the necessary activities such information does not influence their behavior.

In  this  conceptual  system,  expectations of personal mastery  affect both initiation  and persistence  of  coping  behavior.  The  strength of  people's convictions in  their  own  effectiveness  is likely  to  affect  whether  they  will even try to cope  with  given  situations. At this initial  level,  perceived  self-efficacy influences

choice  of  behavioral  settings. People  fear  and tend to avoid threatening situations they believe exceed their coping skills, whereas they get involved  in activities and behave assuredly  when  they judge  themselves capable  of  handling  situations  that  would  otherwise  be intimidating.

Not  only  can  perceived  self-efficacy  have directive influence on choice of activities and settings, but, through expectations  of eventual  success,  it  can  affect coping  efforts once  they  are  initiated.  Efficacy  expectations determine  how  much  effort people will  expend  and  how  long  they  will  persist in  the face of obstacles and aversive  experiences. The  stronger  the  perceived  self-efficacy, the more  active  the  efforts.  Those  who  persist  in subjectively threatening activities that are in fact relatively safe will gain corrective experiences that reinforce their sense of efficacy,  thereby  eventually  eliminating  their defensive  behavior. Those who cease their coping  efforts  prematurely  will  retain  their  selfdebilitating  expectations  and  fears  for  a  long time.

The preceding  analysis  of  how  perceived self-efficacy influences  performance is not meant  to  imply  that  expectation  is  the  sole determinant  of  behavior.  Expectation alone will  not  produce  desired  performance  if  the component capabilities  are  lacking.  Moreover, there are  many  things  that people can  do with  certainty  of  success  that they  do  not perform because they have no incentives to  do  so.  Given  appropriate skills  and  adequate  incentives,  however,  efficacy expectations are a major determinant of people's choice of activities,  how  much  effort  they will expend,  and of  how  long  they will  sustain effort  in  dealing with  stressful  situations.

## Dimensions of Efficacy Expectations

Empirical  tests  of  the  relationship  between expectancy  and performance of threatening activities  have  been  hampered  by  inadequacy of the  expectancy  analysis. In  most studies the  measures of  expectations  are  mainly  concerned  with people's  hopes  for  favorable  outcomes  rather than with  their  sense of  per- sonal mastery. Moreover, expectations are usually assessed globally only at a single point in a change  process as  though  they represent a static, unidimensional factor. Participants  in  experiments  of  this  type  are simply  asked  to  judge how much  they  expect to benefit from a given procedure. When asked  to  make  such  estimates,  participants assume, more often  than not, that  the  benefits will  be  produced by the external ministrations rather than gained through the development  of  self-efficacy. Such  global  measures  reflect  a mixture of, among other  things, hope,  wishful  thinking,  belief  in  the  potency of  the  procedures,  and  faith  in  the  therapist. It therefore  comes  as  no  surprise  that  outcome  expectations  of this type have little relation to  magnitude  of  behavioral change (Davison &amp;  Wilson, 1973,  Lick &amp;  Bootzin, 1975).

Efficacy expectations vary on  several dimensions  that  have  important  performance implications.  They  differ  in magnitude. Thus when  tasks  are  ordered  in  level  of difficulty, the  efficacy  expectations  of  different individuals  may  be limited  to  the  simpler  tasks, extend  to  moderately difficult ones,  or  include even  the  most  taxing  performances.  Efficacy expectations  also differ in generality. Some experiences  create  circumscribed  mastery  expectations. Others  instill  a  more  generalized sense of  efficacy  that  extends  well beyond  the specific treatment situation. In addition, expectancies  vary  in strength. Weak  expectations are easily extinguishable by disconfirming  experiences,  whereas  individuals  who possess strong  expectations of  mastery  will persevere  in  their  coping  efforts despite  dis- confirming experiences.

An adequate expectancy analysis, therefore, requires detailed assessment of the magnitude,  generality, and strength of efficacy  expectations  commensurate  with the precision  with  which  behavioral  processes  are measured.  Both  efficacy  expectations  and  performance should be assessed at significant junctures in the change process to clarify their  reciprocal  effects  on each  other.  Mastery expectations  influence  performance  and are, in  turn,  altered by  the  cumulative  effects  of one's  efforts.

## Sources  of Efficacy Expectations

In this social  learning  analysis, expectations  of  personal  efficacy are based  on four major sources  of  information: performance accomplishments, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion,  and  physiological  states.  Figure 2 presents the diverse influence procedures commonly  used  to  reduce  defensive behavior and presents the principal source  through which each treatment operates to create expectations  of  mastery.  Any  given  method, depending on how it is applied,  may of course draw  to a lesser  extent on one or more other  sources  of  efficacy  information. For  example,  as  we  shall  see  shortly, performancebased treatments not only promote behavioral  accomplishments but  also extinguish fear  arousal,  thus  authenticating self-efficacy through  enactive  and  arousal  sources  of  information.  Other  methods,  however,  provide fewer ways  of  acquiring  information  about one's  capability for  coping  with  threatening situations.  By  postulating  a  common mechanism  of  operation,  this  analysis  provides  a conceptual  framework  within which  to  study behavioral changes achieved by different modes of  treatment.

because  it  is  based  on  personal  mastery  experiences. Successes raise mastery expectations; repeated failures lower them, particularly  if the mishaps  occur  early  in the course  of events. After strong efficacy expectations are developed through repeated success, the negative impact of occasional failures  is  likely  to  be  reduced.  Indeed,  occasional  failures  that  are  later  overcome  by determined effort can strengthen  self-motivated persistence if one finds through  experience that even the most difficult obstacles  can  be  mastered  by  sustained effort. The effects of failure on personal efficacy therefore partly depend  on  the timing  and the  total  pattern  of  experiences  in  which  the failures  occur.

Performance accomplishments. This  source of  efficacy  information is especially  influential

Once established, enhanced self-efficacy  tends to generalize  to other situations in  which performance was self-debilitated by preoccupation  with  personal  inadequacies  (Bandura,  Adams,  &amp;  Beyer,  in  press; Bandura, Jeffery, &amp;  Gajdos, 1975).  As  a result,  improvements in  behavioral  functioning  transfer not only to similar situations  but  to activities that  are  substantially different  from  those  on which  the  treatment  was  focused. Thus,  for example, increased self-efficacy  gained  through rapid  mastery  of a  specific animal phobia  can

## EFFICACY EXPECTATIONS

Figure  2. Major  sources  of  efficacy  information  and  the  principal  sources  through  which different modes  of  treatment  operate.

<!-- image -->

increase coping efforts in social situations as well as reduce  fears  of other animals. However, the generalization effects occur most  predictably to the  activities that are most  similar to  those in  which self-efficacy was restored by treatment  (Bandura,  Blanchard,  &amp; Ritter,  1969).

Methods  of  change  that operate on the basis  of performance accomplishments convey efficacy  information  in more ways than  simply through the evidence of performance  improvements.  In  the  course  of  treatments  employing  modeling  with  guided  performance, participants  acquire  a  generalizable  skill  for dealing  successfully  with  stressful  situations, a  skill  that  they use to overcome a variety of dysfunctional  fears and inhibitions in their everyday life  (Bandura et al., in press;  Bandura et  al., 1975).  Having  a  serviceable coping skill at  one's  disposal undoubtedly contributes to  one's  sense  of  personal  efficacy.  Behavioral capabilities can also be  enhanced through modeling  alone (Bandura, 1971; Flanders, 1968).  However,  participant modeling  provides  additional  opportunities  for  translating behavioral  conceptions  to  appropriate actions and  for  making corrective refinements toward the  perfection  of  skills.

Most of the treatment procedures developed  in  recent  years  to  eliminate fearful and defensive behavior have been implemented either through performance  or  by symbolic procedures. Regardless of the methods involved, results of comparative studies  attest  to  the  superiority  of  performance-based  treatments.  In  the  desensitization approach  devised  by  Wolpe (1974),  clients receive  graduated  exposure to aversive  events in conjunction with anxiety reducing activities, usually in the form of  muscular relaxation.  A  number  of experiments  have been  reported  in  which  relaxation  is  paired with scenes in which phobics visualize themselves engaging  in progressively  more threatening  activities or  with  enactment  of the same hierarchy of activities with the actual threats. Findings based on different types of phobias consistently reveal that performance desensitization produces substantially  greater  behavioral change  than  does symbolic desensitization (LoPicollo, 1970;

Sherman,  1972;  Strahley,  1966).  Physiological  measures  yield  similar  results.  Symbolic desensitization  reduces autonomic responses to imagined but  not to actual  threats,  whereas performance  desensitization  eliminates  autonomic  responses  to  both  imagined  and  actual threats  (Barlow, Leitenberg, Agras, &amp; Wincze, 1969).  The  substantial  benefits  of  successful performance are typically achieved in less time  than  is  required to  extinguish arousal  to symbolic  representations  of  threats.

More recently, avoidance behavior has been  treated  by  procedures involving massive exposure to aversive events. In  this  approach, intense  anxiety  is  elicited  by  prolonged  exposure to the most threatening situations and  sustained  at  high  levels,  without relief, until emotional reactions are  extinguished. Several investigators have compared the relative success of prolonged exposure to aversive  situations  in  imagery and  actual  encounters  with  them  in  ameliorating  chronic agoraphobias. Real  encounters  with threats produce results  decidely superior  to imagined exposure, which  has weak,  variable effects (Emmelkamp &amp;  Wessels, 1975; Stern  &amp; Marks, 1973; Watson, Mullett, &amp;  Pillay, 1973).  Prolonged  encounters that  ensure behavioral improvements are more effective than distributed brief encounters  that are likely  to  end  before  successful performance of the activity is achieved (Rabavilas, Boulougouris,  &amp; Stefanis, 1976).

The  participant  modeling approach  to  the elimination of defensive behavior utilizes successful  performance as  the primary  vehicle of psychological change. People displaying intractable fears and inhibitions are not about  to  do what  they  dread.  In implementing  participant  modeling, therapists therefore structure  the  environment  so that  clients  can perform successfully despite  their  incapacities. This is achieved  by enlisting a variety of response induction aids, including preliminary modeling  of  threatening  activities,  graduated tasks, enactment over graduated temporal intervals,  joint  performance  with  the therapist,  protective  aids  to.reduce  the  likelihood of  feared  consequences,  and  variation  in  the severity of the  threat itself  (Bandura,  Jeffery, &amp;  Wright, 1974).  As  treatment progresses,

the supplementary aids are withdrawn  so that  clients  cope  effectively  unassisted. Selfdirected mastery experiences are then arranged to  reinforce  a  sense  of  personal efficacy.  Through this  form of  treatment incapacitated people rapidly lose their fears, they are able to engage  in  activities they formerly  inhibited, and  they  display  generalized reductions of fears toward threats beyond the specifically treated conditions (Bandura,  1976a).

Participant modeling  has  been  compared with  various  symbolically  based  treatments. These  studies  corroborate  the  superiority of successful  performance  facilitated  by  modeling as compared  to vicarious experience  alone (Bandura  et  al., 1969; Blanchard, 1970b; Lewis,  1974;  Ritter,  1969;  Roper,  Rachman, &amp;  Marks, 1975),  to  symbolic  desensitization (Bandura  et  al.,  1969;  Litvak, 1969),  and to  imaginal  modeling in  which  clients  visualize  themselves  or  others  coping  successfully with  threats (Thase  &amp;  Moss,  1976).  When participant modeling is subsequently administered to those who  benefit  only partially from the  symbolic  procedures,  avoidance behavior is thoroughly eliminated within a  brief  period.

The  findings  summarized  above  are  consistent  with  self-efficacy theory,  but  they  do not  shed  much  light  on  the  mechanism  by which specific mastery  experiences  produce generalized  and  enduring changes in behavior. Verification  of  the  operative  mechanism  requires experimental evidence that experienced mastery does in fact alter the level and strength  of  self-efficacy and  that self-efficacy is,  in  turn,  linked  to  behavior.  We  shall  return later to  research that addresses  itself specifically to the linkages between  treatment  procedures,  perceived  self-efficacy, and behavior.

Vicarious  experience. People  do not  rely on experienced  mastery  as  the  sole  source of  information concerning their level of selfefficacy.  Many  expectations  are  derived  from vicarious experience.  Seeing  others  perform threatening activities without adverse consequences  can  generate  expectations in  observers that  they too  will  improve  if they intensify and  persist in their efforts.  They persuade  themselves  that  if  others  can  do  it, they  should  be  able  to  achieve  at  least  some improvement in performance (Bandura  &amp; Barab, 1973).  Vicarious  experience, relying as it does  on  inferences  from social  comparison,  is  a  less  dependable source  of information about one's capabilities than is direct  evidence  of  personal  accomplishments. Consequently, the efficacy expectations induced by  modeling  alone  are likely to  be weaker  and  more  vulnerable  to  change.

A  number  of  modeling variables  that  are apt  to  affect  expectations  of  personal efficacy have  been  shown  to  enhance  the  disinhibiting influence of modeling  procedures. Phobics benefit more  from seeing models  overcome their difficulties by determined effort than from  observing  facile  performances  by  adept models  (Kazdin,  1973;  Meichenbaum,  1971). Showing the gains achieved by effortful coping  behavior  not  only  minimizes  for  observers the negative impact of temporary distress  but  demonstrates  that  even  the  most anxious  can  eventually  succeed  through  perseverance. Similarity  to  the  model  in  other characteristics, which  increases  the  personal relevance  of  vicariously  derived  information, can likewise enhance the effectiveness of symbolic  modeling  (Kazdin,  1974b).

Modeled behavior with clear outcomes conveys more efficacy  information than  if  the effects of the modeled  actions  remain  ambiguous.  In investigations  of  vicarious  processes,  observing  one  perform  activities  that meet with success does, indeed, produce greater behavioral improvements  than witnessing  the  same  performances modeled  without  any  evident consequences (Kazdin, 1974c, 1975). Diversified  modeling,  in which the activities  observers  regard  as  hazardous are repeatedly  shown  to  be  safe  by  a  variety  of models,  is  superior  to  exposure  to  the  same performances  by  a  single  model  (Bandura &amp; Menlove,  1968;  Kazdin,  1974a,  1975, 1976). If people  of  widely  differing characteristics can  succeed,  then observers  have  a reasonable  basis for  increasing  their  own  sense  of self-efficacy.

The  pattern  of  results  reported  above  offers  at  least  suggestive  support  for  the  view that  exemplifications of  success  through  sus-

tained  effort  with  substantiating  comparative information can  enhance  observers'  perceptions  of  their  own  performance  capabilities. Research  will  be  presented  below  that  bears more  directly  on  the  proposition  that  modeling procedures alter avoidance behavior through  the  intervening  influence  of efficacy expectations.

Verbal  persuasion. In  attempts  to  influence human  behavior,  verbal  persuasion  is  widely used because  of  its ease and ready availability.  People  are led, through  suggestion, into  believing they  can  cope  successfully with what has  overwhelmed  them in the past. Efficacy  expectations  induced  in  this  manner are also likely to be weaker  than those arising from one's own accomplishments because they  do not  provide an  authentic  experiential base for them. In the face of distressing threats  and  a  long history  of  failure  in  coping with them, whatever mastery expectations are induced by suggestion can be readily extinguished  by  disconfirming  experiences.

Results  of  several  lines  of  research  attest to  the  limitation  of  procedures  that  attempt to instill outcome expectations in people simply  by  telling  them what  to  expect.  In laboratory  studies,  "placebo"  conditions  designed suggestively to raise expectations  of improvement produce little change in refractory behavior (Lick &amp;  Bootzin, 1975; Moore,  1965;  Paul, 1966).  Whether  this  is due  to  the  low  credibility  of  the  suggestions or  to  the  weakness  of  the  induced  expectations  cannot  be  determined  from  these  studies, because the expectations were not measured.

Numerous experiments have been conducted  in  which  phobics  receive  desensitization treatment without  any expectancy  information  or with  suggestions  that  it  is  either highly efficacious or ineffective. The differential  outcome  expectations  are  verbally  induced  prior  to,  during,  or  immediately  after treatment  in the various  studies.  The findings generally show  that desensitization  reduces phobic behavior,  but  the  outcome  expectancy manipulations  have  either  no  effect  or  weak, inconsistent  ones  (Hewlett  &amp;  Nawas,  1971; McGlynn &amp; Mapp,  1970; McGlynn,  Mealiea, &amp; Nawas, 1969;  McGlynn, Reynolds, &amp;

Linder,  1971). As in the "placebo" studies,  it is  difficult  to  make  conclusive  interpretations because the outcome expectations induced suggestively  are  not  measured  prior  to  the assessment of behavior changes, if at all. Simply  informing  participants that  they  will or  will  not benefit from  treatment  does  not mean  that  they  necessarily  believe  what  they are  told,  especially  when  it  contradicts their other  personal  experiences.  Moreover,  in  the studies just cited the verbal influence is aimed mainly at  raising outcome  expectations rather than  at enhancing  self-efficacy. It is changes on the latter dimension that are most relevant to the theory under discussion.

Although  social  persuasion  alone  may  have definite  limitations  as  a  means  of creating  an enduring sense  of personal efficacy, it can contribute  to  the  successes  achieved  through corrective  performance.  That  is,  people  who are  socially  persuaded that  they  possess the capabilities to  master  difficult  situations  and are provided with provisional aids for effective  action  are  likely  to  mobilize  greater effort than  those  who  receive  only  the  performance aids. However, to raise by persuasion  expectations  of  personal  competence without  arranging  conditions  to  facilitate  effective  performance  will  most  likely  lead to failures that discredit the persuaders and further undermine  the  recipients' perceived self-efficacy.  It  is  therefore  the  interactive,  as well as the independent, effects of social persuasion  on  self-efficacy that  merit  experimental  consideration.

Emotional arousal. Stressful and taxing situations generally elicit emotional arousal that,  depending  on  the  circumstances,  might have  informative  value  concerning  personal competency.  Therefore,  emotional  arousal  is another constituent source of  information that  can  affect  perceived  self-efficacy in  coping  with  threatening  situations. People rely partly  on  their  state  of  physiological  arousal in  judging  their  anxiety  and  vulnerability  to stress. Because  high  arousal usually debilitates performance, individuals are more likely to  expect  success  when  they are  not beset by  aversive arousal than if  they are tense and  viscerally agitated. Fear reactions  gen-

erate further fear of impending stressful situations through  anticipatory self-arousal. By conjuring up fear-provoking thoughts about  their  ineptitude,  individuals  can  rouse themselves  to  elevated  levels  of  anxiety  that far exceed the fear experienced  during  the actual  threatening  situation.

As  will be  recalled from the earlier discussion,  desensitization  and  massive  exposure treatments aimed at extinguishing  anxiety arousal  produce  some  reductions in  avoidance behavior.  Anxiety  arousal to  threats  is  likewise  diminished  by modeling,  and is  even more  thoroughly  eliminated  by  experienced mastery  achieved  through  participant  modeling (Bandura  &amp;  Barab, 1973; Bandura  et al.,  1969;  Blanchard,  1970a).  Modeling  approaches  have other  advantages  for enhancing self-efficacy and thereby removing  dysfunctional  fears.  In  addition  to diminishing proneness  to  aversive  arousal,  such  approaches  also teach  effective  coping  skills  by  demonstrating proficient  ways  of handling  threatening  situations.  The  latter  contribution is especially  important  when  fear  arousal  partly  results  from behavioral  deficits.  It is  often the  case  that fears  and  deficits  are  interdependent. Avoidance  of  stressful  activities  impedes  development  of  coping  skills,  and  the  resulting  lack of competency  provides  a  realistic  basis  for fear. Acquiring behavioral means for controlling  potential  threats  attenuates  or  eliminates fear arousal (Averill, 1973; Notterman,  Schoenfeld,  &amp;  Bersh, 1952; Szpiler  &amp; Epstein, 1976).  Behavioral  control  not  only allows  one  to  manage  the  aversive  aspects  of an  environment.  It  also  affects  how  the  environment  is  likely  to  be  perceived.  Potentially stressful situations that can  be  controlled are construed as less threatening, and such cognitive appraisals further reduce  anticipatory  emotional  arousal  (Averill, 1973).

Diminishing  emotional  arousal  can  reduce avoidance behavior, but different theories posit different explanatory mechanisms for the observed effects. In the theory from which the emotive  treatments  are derived, emotional  arousal  is  conceived  of  as  a  drive that  activates  avoidance  behavior.  This  view stresses the energizing function of arousal

and the reinforcing  function of  arousal reduction.  Social  learning  theory,  on  the  other hand, emphasizes the informative function of  physiological  arousal.  Simply  acknowledging  that  arousal  is  both  informative and  motivating  by  no  means  resolves  the  issue  in dispute,  because  these are  not  necessarily  two separate  effects  that  somehow jointly  produce behavior.  Rather,  the  cognitive  appraisal  of arousal  to  a  large  extent  determines  the  level and direction of motivational inducements to action. Certain cognitive appraisals  of one's  physiological  state  might  be  energizing, whereas  other appraisals of  the  same  state might  not (Weiner,  1972).  Moreover,  many forms  of  physiological  arousal  are generated cognitively by arousing trains of thought. When motivation is conceptualized  in terms of cognitive  processes (Bandura,  1977;  Weiner, 1972),  the  informational and  motivational  effects  of  arousal  are  treated  as  interdependent rather  than  as  separate  events.  We  shall  return  to  this  issue  later  when  we  consider  the differential  predictions made from  social  learning theory and  from  the  dual-process theory of avoidance  behavior  concerning the  behavioral effects  of  extinguishing  anxiety  arousal.

Researchers working  within the attributional  framework  have  attempted to  modify avoidance  behavior  by  directly  manipulating the cognitive  labeling  of  emotional arousal (Valins  &amp;  Nisbett, 1971).  The  presumption is  that  if  phobics  are  led  to believe that  the things  they  have  previously  feared  no  longer affect  them  internally, the  cognitive  reevaluation  alone  will  reduce avoidance  behavior.  In treatment analogues  of  this  approach,  phobics  receive  false  physiological  feedback  suggesting  that  they  are  no  longer emotionally upset  by  threatening  events.  Results  of  this procedure are essentially negative. Early claims  that  erroneous arousal feedback reduces avoidance behavior (Valins  &amp;  Ray, 1967) are disputed by methodologically superior  studies  showing  that  false  feedback of physiological tranquility  in the  presence of threats has either no appreciable effect on subsequent fearful behavior (Gaupp, Stern,  &amp; Galbraith,  1972; Hewlett  &amp;  Nawas, 1971;  Kent,  Wilson,  &amp; Nelson,  1972;  Rosen, Rosen,  &amp;  Reid,  1972;  Sushinsky  &amp; Bootzin,

1970), or produces minor changes under such limited conditions as to be of little practical  consequence  (Borkovec,  1973).

Misattribution of emotional arousal is another variant of the attributional approach to modification of fearful behavior. The  strategy here  is  to  lead fearful people into believing  that their emotional arousal is  caused  by  a  nonemotional  source.  To  the extent that they no longer label their agitated  state  as  anxiety,  they  will  behave more  boldly.  It may  be  possible to  reduce mild fears  by  this  means (Ross,  Rodin,  &amp; Zimbardo,  1969),  but  the  highly  anxious  are not easily led into misattributing their  anxiety to  irrelevant  sources (Nisbett &amp;  Schachter, 1966).  When  evaluated  systematically,  misattribution treatments do  not produce  significant changes  in chronic anxiety conditions  (Singerman, Borkovec,  &amp; Baron, 1976), and  some  of  the  benefits  reported  with  other dysfunctions  cannot be  replicated (Bootzin, Herman,  &amp; Nicassio,  1976;  Kellogg  &amp; Baron, 197S). There  is also some suggestive evidence that  in  laboratory studies  the  attenuation  of fear  may  be  due  more  to  the  veridicality of arousal  information  than  to  misattribution  of fear  arousal  to  an  innocuous source  (CalvertBoyanowsky  &amp; Leventhal, 1975).

Any  reduction  in  fear resulting  from deceptive feedback is apt to be short-lived because  illusory  assurances  are  not  an  especially reliable  way  of  creating  durable selfexpectations. However, more veritable experiences  that  reduce  the  level  of  emotional arousal  can set  in  motion  a  reciprocal  process of change.  In the social learning  view,  potential  threats activate fear  largely  through cognitive self-arousal  (Bandura,  1969, 1977). Perceived  self-competence can  therefore affect  susceptibility  to  self-arousal.  Individuals who come to believe  that they are less vulnerable than they  previously  assumed  are  less prone to generate frightening thoughts in threatening situations. Those whose fears are relatively  weak may  reduce  their  selfdoubts  and debilitating self-arousal  to the point  where  they  perform  successfully. Performance  successes,  in  turn,  strengthen selfefficacy. Such changes can, of course, be reliably achieved without resort to ruses.

Moreover,  mislabeling  arousal  or  attributing it to  erroneous  sources  is  unlikely to  be  of much help to the highly anxious. Severe acrophobics, for  example, may  be  temporarily misled into believing that they no  longer fear  high  elevations, but they  will  reexperience  unnerving  internal  feedback  when  confronted  with  dreaded  heights.  It  should  also be  noted  that in  attributional explanations of the success  of  behavioral treatments the heavy emphasis on physiological arousal derives more from speculations about the nature of emotion (Schachter, 1964) than from  evidence that  arousal  is  a  major  determinant  of  defensive  behavior.

## Cognitive  Processing oj  Efficacy Information

The  discussion  thus  far  has  centered  primarily  on  the  many  sources of  informationenactive,  vicarious,  exhortative,  and  emotive -that  people use to judge their level  of self-efficacy.  At  this  point  a  distinction  must be  drawn  between  information contained  in environmental events and information as processed  and  transformed  by  the  individual. The impact of information on efficacy expectations  will depend on how it is cognitively appraised. A  number  of  contextual factors, including the  social,  situational,  and  temporal circumstances under which events occur, enter into  such  appraisals. For this reason,  even success  experiences  do  not  necessarily  create strong generalized  expectations of personal efficacy.  Expectations that  have  served selfprotective  functions  for years  are  not  quickly discarded. When  experience contradicts firmly established  expectations  of  self-efficacy, they may  undergo  little  change  if  the  conditions of performance  are  such  as  to  lead  one  to discount  the  import  of the  experience.

The  corrective value of information derived from successful performance can be attenuated  in  several  ways.  The  first  involves discrimination processes.  The consequences individuals  anticipate  were  they  to  perform feared  activities  differ  in  circumstances  which vary  in  safeguards.  As  a  result,  they  may behave  boldly  in  situations  signifying  safety, but  retain  unchanged  their  self-doubts under less secure  conditions. Such  mitigative discriminations can extend to the treatments

themselves,  as  well  as  to  the  situational  circumstances  in  which  behavioral attainments occur.  This  is  especially true  of treatments relying  solely  on  symbolic  and  vicarious  experience. Achieving  reductions  in fear to threats  presented  symbolically is  unlikely  to enhance  perceived  self-efficacy to  any great extent  in  people  who  believe  that  success  in imagery  does  not  portend accomplishments in  reality.  Information  conveyed  by  facilely modeled performances might likewise be minimized by anxious observers on the grounds that the models possess special expertise  enabling  them  to  prevent injurious consequences  that  might  otherwise befall  the unskilled.  Because  such  discriminations,  even though  objectively  mistaken,  impede  change in  self-efficacy,  observers  will  be  reluctant  to attempt feared activities  and will  be easily dissuaded  by negative experience.

Cognitive  appraisals  of  the  causes  of  one's behavior,  which  have  been  examined  extensively in investigations of self-attributional processes  (Bern,  1972),  can  similarly  delimit gains  in  self-efficacy from  behavioral  attainments. It was  previously shown that attributions  of affect and actions to  illusory competence have little, if any, effect on refractory  behavior. This  does not,  of  course, mean  that  causal  appraisals are of  limited importance in  the process  of behavior change. Quite  the  contrary,  performance  attainment is  a  prominent source of  efficacy information, but  it  is  by  no  means  unambiguous. As  already mentioned briefly, people can gain competence through authentic means  but, because of faulty  appraisals of the circumstances  under which they  improve, will credit their  achievements  to  external  factors  rather than to their own  capabilities. Here the problem  is  one of inaccurate  ascription of personal competency  to  situational factors. Successes are more  likely to enhance  selfefficacy if performances  are perceived as resulting  from skill  than from fortuitous or special external aids. Conversely, failures would  be  expected  to  produce  greater  reductions in self-efficacy when attributed to ability rather than to unusual situational circumstances.  The  more  extensive the  situational  aids  for  performance,  the  greater  are the  chances that  behavior will  be  ascribed to external factors (Bern, 1972; Weiner,

1972).

Even  under  conditions  of  perceived selfdetermination of outcomes, the impact of performance  attainments  on  self-efficacy  will vary  depending on whether  one's  accomplishments  are  ascribed mainly  to  ability or  to effort. Success with minimal effort fosters ability ascriptions that reinforce  a strong sense  of  self-efficacy. By  contrast, analogous successes  achieved  through  high  expenditure of  effort  connote  a  lesser  ability  and  are  thus likely  to  have  a  weaker  effect  on  perceived self-efficacy. Cognitive  appraisals of  the  difficulty  level  of  the  tasks will further  affect  the impact  of  performance  accomplishments  on perceived self-efficacy. To succeed at easy tasks  provides  no  new  information for  altering  one's  sense  of  self-efficacy,  whereas  mastery  of  challenging  tasks  conveys  salient  evidence of  enhanced  competence.  The  rate  and pattern  of  attainments  furnish  additional  information  for judging personal  efficacy.  Thus, people  who  experience  setbacks  but detect relative progress will raise their perceived efficacy  more  than  those  who succeed  but  see their  performances leveling  off  compared to their  prior  rate  of  improvement.

Extrapolations  from  theories  about  attribution  and self-perception  to  the  field  of  behavioral change often  imply  that people must labor unaided  or  under  inconspicuously  arranged influences  if they are to convince themselves of their personal competence (Kopel  &amp;  Arkowitz,  1975). Such  prescriptions are open to question on both conceptual and empirical grounds. Cognitive misappraisals that attenuate the  impact  of disconfirming experiences  can  be  minimized without sacrificing the substantial benefits of powerful induction procedures. This is achieved  by  providing  opportunities for  selfdirected accomplishments after the desired behavior  has  been  established.  Any  lingering doubts  people  might  have,  either  about  their capabilities  or  about  probable  response  consequences  under  unprotected  conditions,  are dispelled easily in this manner (Bandura et  al.,  197S).  The  more  varied the  circumstances in which  threats are mastered in-

dependently,  the  more  likely  are  success  experiences to authenticate personal efficacy and to  impede  formation  of  discriminations that insulate  self-perceptions  from  disconfirming  evidence.

Results of recent studies support the thesis that generalized, lasting changes in self-efficacy and behavior can best be achieved  by participant  methods using powerful induction  procedures  initially  to  develop capabilities, then  removing  external  aids to verify personal efficacy, then finally using self-directed  mastery  to  strengthen  and  generalize expectations of personal efficacy (Bandura et al., 1975). Independent performance can enhance  efficacy expectations in several ways: (a) It creates additional exposure  to former threats,  which  provides participants  with  further evidence  that  they are no  longer aversively aroused by what they previously feared. Reduced  emotional arousal  confirms  increased  coping capabilities, (b)  Self-directed mastery  provides opportunities to perfect coping skills, which lessen personal  vulnerability  to  stress,  (c) Independent  performance, if  well  executed,  produces success experiences,  which  further reinforce expectations  of  self-competency.

Extensive self-directed performance of formerly threatening activities under progressively challenging conditions  at a  time when treatments  are usually  terminated  could also  serve  to  reduce  susceptibility  to  relearning  of  defensive patterns  of  behavior.  A  few negative encounters  among  many successful experiences  that  have  instilled  a  strong  sense of self-efficacy will, at most, establish discriminative  avoidance  of  realistic  threats,  an effect  that  has  adaptive  value.  In  contrast, if people  have  limited  contact with  previously feared objects after treatment, whatever expectations of self-efficacy were instated would be  weaker and more  vulnerable to change. Consequently, a few  unfavorable experiences  are  likely  to  reestablish  defensive behavior  that  generalizes inappropriately.

We  have  already  examined  how  cognitive processing of information conveyed  by modeling might influence the extent to which vicarious  experience effects changes  in  selfefficacy. Among  the especially informative elements are  the  models'  characteristics (e.g., adeptness,  perseverance,  age,  expertness),  the similarity  between  models  and  observers,  the difficulty  of  the  performance tasks,  the  situational  arrangements under which  the  modeled achievements occur, and the diversity of modeled  attainments.

Just  as the  value of  efficacy  information generated  enactively  and  vicariously  depends on  cognitive  appraisal, so  does  the  information arising from exhortative and emotive sources.  The  impact  of  verbal  persuasion  on self-efficacy may  vary  substantially depending  on  the  perceived  credibility  of  the  persuaders, their prestige, trustworthiness,  expertise, and  assuredness. The  more  believable the source of the information, the more likely are efficacy expectations to change. The influence of credibility on attitudinal change has, of course, received intensive study.  But  its  effects  on perceived  self-efficacy remain  to  be  investigated.

People judge their physiological arousal largely  on  the  basis  of  their  appraisal  of  the instigating  conditions.  Thus,  visceral  arousal occurring in situations perceived to be threatening  is  interpreted  as  fear,  arousal  in thwarting  situations  is  experienced  as  anger, and  that  resulting  from irretrievable  loss  of valued objects as sorrow (Hunt, Cole,  &amp; Reis,  1958).  Even  the  same  source  of  physiological arousal  may be interpreted  differently in ambiguous situations depending on the emotional reactions of others in the same setting  (Mandler,  1975;  Schachter  &amp; Singer, 1962).

When  tasks are  performed  in  ambiguous or complex  situations in which there  is a  variety of  evocative  stimuli,  the  informational  value of the  resultant arousal  will  depend  on the meaning  imposed  upon  it.  People  who  perceive  their  arousal  as  stemming from  personal inadequacies  are  more  likely  to  lower their efficacy  expectations than  those  who  attribute their arousal to certain situational factors. Given  a  proneness  to  ascribe  arousal  to  personal  deficiencies,  the  heightened  attention  to internal events can result in reciprocally escalating  arousal.  Indeed,  as  Sarason  (1976) has  amply  documented, individuals  who  are especially susceptible to anxiety arousal

readily become self-preoccupied with their perceived inadequacies  in the face of  dif- ficulties  rather  than  with  the  task  at  hand.

## Differing Perspectives  on Self-efficacy

The  phenomena  encompassed  by  the  construct  of  self-efficacy  have  been  the subject of interest in other theories  of  human behavior. The theoretical perspectives differ, however,  in  how  they  view  the  nature  and origins  of  personal  efficacy  and  the intervening  processes  by  which  perceived  self-efficacy affects behavior.  In seeking  a motivational explanation  of  exploratory  and  manipulative behavior,  White  (1959)  postulated  an  "effectance  motive,"  which  is  conceptualized as  an intrinsic  drive  for  transactions  with  the  environment. Unlike instigators arising from tissue deficits, effectance motivation is believed to be  aroused by novel  stimulation and  is  sustained  when  the  resultant  inquisitive  and  exploratory  actions  produce  further elements of novelty in the stimulus  field. The effectance motive  presumably develops through  cumulative  acquisition  of knowledge and  skills  in  dealing  with  the  environment. However,  the  process  by  which  an effectance motive emerges from effective transactions with  the environment  is  not  spelled  out  in White's  theory.  Nor  is  the  existence  of  the motive easy to verify, because effectance motivation  is  inferred from the exploratory behavior  it supposedly  causes.  Without  an independent  measure  of  motive  strength  one cannot tell whether people explore and  manipulate  things  because  of  a  competence  motive to  do  so, or  for  any  number of  other  reasons. Athough  the  theory  of  effectance motivation has  not been  formulated  in  sufficient detail to  permit  extensive  theoretical  comparisons, there  are  several  issues  on  which  the social learning  and  effectance  theories  clearly  differ.

In the  social  learning  analysis,  choice  behavior  and effort expenditure  are  governed in part by percepts of self-efficacy rather than  by  a  drive  condition. Because efficacy expectations  are defined and measured  independently of performance,  they provide an explicit basis  for predicting the  occurrence, generality, and persistence of coping be- havior, whereas an omnibus  motive does not.  People will  approach, explore,  and try to deal with situations within their selfperceived capabilities, but they will avoid transactions with stressful  aspects of their environment  they  perceive  as  exceeding  their

ability.

The alternative views  also differ on the origins  of  efficacy.  Within  the  framework of effectance theory, the effectance drive  develops gradually through prolonged transactions  with  one's  surroundings.  This  theory thus  focuses almost  exclusively  on  the effects produced  by  one's  own actions.  In  the  social learning  theory,  self-efficacy  is conceptualized as  arising from diverse sources  of  information conveyed  by direct  and mediated  experience.  These  differences  in  theoretical  approach  have  significant  implications  for  how one goes  about  studying  the  role  of  perceived self-efficacy in  motivational  and behavioral processes. Expectations  of personal efficacy do  not  operate  as  dispositional  determinants independently of contextual factors. Some situations require greater skill and more arduous  performances and  carry  higher  risk of negative consequences than do others. Expectations  will  vary  accordingly.  Thus, for example,  the  level  and  strength  of  perceived self-efficacy in public speaking will differ depending  on  the  subject  matter,  the  format of  the  presentation,  and the types  of  audiences that will be addressed. The social learning  approach is therefore based on  a microanalysis of  perceived coping  capabilities rather than  on  global personality traits  or motives  of  effectance.  From  this  perspective, it is  no  more  informative  to  speak of  selfefficacy in  general  terms  than to speak  of nonspecific  approach behavior.  To  elucidate how  perceived  self-efficacy affects behavior requires  a  microanalysis  of  both  factors.

Discrepancies between efficacy expectations and performance  are most likely to arise  under  conditions  in which  situational and  task  factors  are  ambiguous.  When  performance  requirements  are  ill-defined,  people who  underestimate  the  situational  demands will display positive  discrepancies  between self-efficacy and performance attainments;

those who  overestimate the demands will

exhibit  negative discrepancies. Therefore,  in testing predictions from the conceptual scheme  presented here  it  is  important that subjects understand what kind  of  behavior will be required  and the circumstances  in which  they  will  be  asked to  perform them. Moreover,  performances  and  the  corresponding  efficacy expectations  should  be  analyzed into separate activities, and preferably ordered by  level  of difficulty. In this type of microanalysis both the efficacy expectations and the corresponding behaviors are measured  in  terms  of  explicit  types  of  performances  rather  than  on  the  basis  of  global indices.

The social learning  determinants  of selfefficacy can be varied systematically and their effects measured. Hence, propositions concerning the origins of self-efficacy are verifiable  with  some  precision.  A  slowly  developing motive, however,  does not easily lend itself to being tested experimentally. Another  dimension  on  which  the  alternative theories  might  be  judged  is  their  power to produce the phenomena they purport to explain.  As we shall  see later,  there  are  more diverse, expeditious, and powerful ways  of creating self-efficacy than  by relying solely on  novel  stimulation  arising  from  exploratory actions.

With  the  ascendency  of  cognitive  views of behavior, the concept of  expectancy is  assuming  an increasingly  prominent place in contemporary  psychological thought (Bolles, 1972b; Heneman,  &amp;  Schwab, 1972;  Irwin, 1971).  However,  virtually  all  of  the  theorizing and experimentation has focused on action-outcome  expectations.  The ideas advanced  in  some  of  the theories nevertheless bear some likeness to the notion of selfefficacy. According  to  the  theory  of  personality proposed by Rotter (1966), behavior varies as a function of generalized expectancies  that  outcomes  are  determined  by  one's actions or by external forces beyond one's control.  Such  expectations  about the instrumentality of  behavior are considered to  be largely  a  product  of one's history of  reinforcement.  Much  of  the  research  within this  tradition is  concerned with the behavioral cor- relates  of  individual  differences in  the tend-

ency  to  perceive  events  as  being  either  personally  or  externally  determined.

The notion of locus of control is often treated  in  the  literature  as  analogous  to  selfefficacy.  However, Rotter's  (1966)  conceptual scheme is  primarily concerned  with causal beliefs about action-outcome contingencies rather  than  with  personal  efficacy.  Perceived self-efficacy and beliefs about the locus  of causality  must  be  distinguished, because  convictions that outcomes are determined by one's  own  actions  can  have  any  number  of effects on  self-efficacy and behavior.  People who regard outcomes as personally  determined but who  lack  the requisite  skills  would  experience  low  self-efficacy and  view  activities with  a  sense  of  futility.  Thus,  for  example, a  child  who  fails  to  grasp  arithmetic  concepts and expects  course  grades to  be  dependent entirely  on  skill in the subject matter has every  reason  to  be  demoralized. While  causal beliefs and self-efficacy refer to different phenomena,  as  we have  already  noted,  causal ascriptions  of  behavior  to  skill  or  to  chance can  mediate the effects of  performance  attainments  on self-efficacy.

The  theoretical  framework  presented  in  the present article is  generalizable  beyond the psychotherapy  domain  to  other  psychological phenomena  involving  behavioral  choices  and regulation  of  effort  in  activities  that  can  have adverse  effects. For example,  the theory  of learned  helplessness  advanced  by  Maier  and Seligman  (1976)  assumes  that  as  a  result of being subjected to uncontrollable aversive events,  organisms  acquire  expectancies that actions do not affect outcomes. Because they  come  to  expect  future  responding to  be futile, they no longer initiate behavior in situations  where  outcomes  are  in fact controllable  by  responses.  Although  this  theory posits an  expectancy  mechanism of  operation, it focuses exclusively  on  response-outcome expectancies.

Theorizing  and  experimentation on  learned helplessness might well consider the conceptual  distinction  between  efficacy  and  outcome  expectations. People can  give  up  trying because they lack a sense of efficacy in achieving  the  required  behavior,  or  they  may be  assured  of  their capabilities  but  give  up

trying  because  they  expect  their  behavior  to have  no  effect on  an  unresponsive  environment  or  to  be  consistently  punished.  These two  separable  expectancy  sources  of  futility have  quite  different  antecedents  and  remedial implications. To  alter efficacy-based futility requires development of competencies and expectations of personal effectiveness. By contrast, to change outcome-based futility necessitates changes in prevailing  environmental contingencies that restore the instrumental value of the competencies that people already  possess.

## Microanalysis of Self-efficacy and  Behavioral

## Change

To  test  derivations  from  the  social  learning analysis of the process of change, an experiment was conducted wherein severe phobics received treatments designed to create differential levels of efficacy expectations,  and  then  the  relationship  between  selfefficacy  and  behavioral  change  was  analyzed in  detail  (Bandura  et  al.,  in  press).  The experiment  proceeded  as  follows.  Adult  snake phobics, whose phobias  affected  their lives  adversely, were administered for equivalent periods  either participant modeling,  modeling  alone, or  no  treatment. In participant modeling, which operates through direct mastery  experiences, subjects were  assisted, by  whatever  induction  aids  were  needed,  to engage  in  progressively  more  threatening  interactions  with  a  boa  constrictor.  After  completing  all  the  therapeutic tasks,  which  included  holding the  snake,  placing  open  hands in  front of  its  head  as  it  moved  about the room, holding the snake  in front of their faces,  and  allowing it  to  crawl  freely  in  their laps,  the  subjects  engaged  in  a  brief  period of self-directed  mastery. In the  present  experiment, the modeling  aid  was  used  only briefly  if  needed  to  help  initiate performance in  order  to  minimize overlap  of  this  element in  the  two  modes  of  treatment.

Subjects  receiving  the  modeling treatment merely  observed the therapist perform  the same activities for an equivalent period. These subjects  did not engage in any  behavior themselves, and consequently they had  no performance  sources  of  information  for  their efficacy  expectations.  Enactive  and  vicarious procedures  were  selected  for  study  to  assess the  predictive  value of self-efficacy created

by  quite  different  modes  of  treatment.

The  level,  strength,  and  generality  of  the subjects'  efficacy  expectations  were measured at critical  junctures  in  the  change  process. Subjects  privately  designated, on  a  list  of  18 performance tasks ranked in order of increasing  threat,  those  tasks  they considered themselves  capable  of  executing.  They then rated the  strength of  their  expectations  for each  of these  tasks  on a  100-point  probability scale  ranging, in  10-unit  intervals,  from  great uncertainty,  through  intermediate values  of certainty,  to  complete  certainty.  They  rated their efficacy expectations for coping with snakes  of  the  same  variety  used  in  treatment as  well  as  dissimilar  snakes  to  measure  the generality of their efficacy expectations. These  measures  were obtained  prior  to  treatment, following treatment but before the behavioral  posttest,  and  after  completing  the posttest.  Approach behavior  was  assessed  in the  posttest  by  a  series  of  performance tasks requiring  increasingly more threatening interactions with a different  type of boa constrictor from  the  one  used  in  treatment and  with  a corn  snake  of  markedly  different  appearance but  equivalent  threat  value.  Different  phobic objects were  used  to  provide  a  test  of  the generalized effects of changes in efficacy expectations  along  a  dimension  of  similarity to  the  threat  used  in  treatment.

Subjects  assigned  to  the  control  condition participated in the assessment procedures without  receiving any  intervening  treatment. Following completion of the posttest, the controls  and  those  in  the  modeling condition who  failed  to  achieve  terminal performances received  the  participant  modeling  treatment.

Consistent  with the social  learning  analysis of the sources of self-efficacy, experiences based  on  performance accomplishments  produced  higher,  more generalized,  and  stronger efficacy expectations  than did vicarious  experience, which  in turn exceeded  those in the  control  condition.  Figure  3  summarizes the level of efficacy expectations  and per- formance  as  a  function  of  treatment  condi-

Figure  3. Level  of  efficacy  expectations  and  approach  behavior  displayed  by  subjects  toward  threats after  receiving  vicarious  or  enactive  treatments,  or  no  treatment (Bandura et  al.,  in  press).

<!-- image -->

tions  at different phases of  the  experiment. As  shown  in  the  figure,  performance  change corresponds  closely  to  the  magnitude  of  expectancy  change.  The  greater  the  increments in self-perceived efficacy, the greater the changes  in  behavior.  Similar  relationships  between  level  of  self-efficacy and  performance are  obtained  when  the  data  are  considered separately for  the  two  snakes.  In  accordance with prediction, participant modeling produced  the  more  generalized  increases  in efficacy expectations and  the  more  generalized behavioral  changes.

Although  the  enactive  and  vicarious  treatments differed in their power to enhance self-efficacy, the efficacy expectations were equally  predictive of  subsequent performance irrespective  of  how  they  were  instated.  The higher  the  level  of  perceived self-efficacy at the  completion  of  treatment the  higher  was the level  of  approach behavior for efficacy expectations instated  enactively (r =  .83)  and vicariously (r = .84).  It  might  be  noted  here that all  subjects  had at their disposal the component  responses  for  producing  the  interactive  patterns  of  behavior,  and  they  all  had some  incentive  to  overcome  their  phobic  behavior. Under conditions in which people differ  substantially  in  component  capabilities and motivation, skill  and incentive factors will  also  contribute  to  variance  in  performance.

Correlation  coefficients based  on  aggregate measures  do  not fully reveal the degree  of correspondence  between  self-efficacy and  performance on the specific behavioral tasks from  which the  aggregate  scores  are  obtained. A  subject  can  display  an  equivalent  number of efficacy expectations and successful performances, but they might not correspond entirely  to  the  same  tasks.  The  most precise index  of the relationship is  provided by a microanalysis  of  the  congruence  between  selfefficacy and  performance  at the  level  of  individual  tasks. This measure  was obtained  by recording  whether  or  not  subjects  considered themselves capable of performing  each of the  various tasks at the end  of treatment and  by  computing  the  percentage  of  accurate correspondence between efficacy judgment and  actual performance.  Self-efficacy was  a uniformly accurate  predictor  of  performance on  tasks varying  in difficulty with different threats  regardless  of  whether  the  changes  in self-efficacy  were  produced  through  performance  accomplishments (89%  congruence)  or by vicarious experience alone (86% congruence).  The  degree  of  congruence  between perceived  self-efficacy and  subsequent behavior  is  equally  high  for  enactive (82%)  and

vicarious  (79%)  treatments  when  the  microanalysis  is  conducted  only  on  the subset  of tasks  that subjects had never performed  in the pretest assessment.

In  the  preceding  analysis  efficacy expectations were considered without regard to strength.  A  weak  sense  of  self-efficacy thus received the same  weight  as  one reflecting complete certitude. However,  the intensity and  persistence  of  effort,  and  hence  level  of performance, should be  higher with  strong than  with  weak  self-efficacy. The  likelihood that  a  task  will  be  performed  as  a  function of  the  strength  of  the  corresponding  efficacy expectation therefore  provides  a further refinement  in  the  analysis of  the relationship between  self-efficacy and performance.  The probability  of  successful  performance  of  any given  task  as a  function  of strength  of  efficacy expectations  is  plotted  in  Figure  4.  Because the  control  subjects  performed  few  responses and had correspondingly  restricted efficacy expectations, their data were  plotted after they  had  received  the  participant  modeling treatment.  In  all  conditions,  the  stronger  the efficacy expectations, the higher was the likelihood that a particular task would  be successfully  completed. The  positive  relationship between  strength of self-efficacy and probability  of  successful  performance  is  virtually  identical  for  the  similar  and  the dissimilar  threats.

In  brief,  the  theory  systematizes  a  variety of  findings.  As  the  preceding  results  show,  it predicts  accurately the  magnitude  and  generality  of  behavioral  change  for  efficacy expectations  induced  enactively  and  vicariously. Moreover,  it orders variations in level  of behavioral  change  occurring  within  the  same treatment condition.  Subjects  who  received participant modeling,  either  as  the  primary or  as  the  supplementary  treatment, successfully  performed  all  of  the  behaviors  in  treatment  that  were later  assessed  in  the  posttest toward different threats. Although all  had previously achieved maximal  performances, not all  expressed maximal  efficacy expectations.  One  can  therefore  compare  the error rates  of  predictions  made  from  maximal past performance  and from  maximal  efficacy expectations. It would  be  predicted from the proposed  theory  that  among  these  successful performers,  those  who  acquire  maximal efficacy  expectations  should  attain  terminal  performances,  whereas  those holding  lower  expectations should  not. If one  predicts that those  who performed  maximally in  treatment will  likewise  achieve  terminal  performances when  assessed with  similar  tasks,  the error rate is  relatively  low  for  the  similar threat (28%) but high for the dissimilar threat (52%). If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  predicts that  those  who express  maximal  expectations will perform  maximally, the error rate is comparably  low  for  both  the  similar (21%) and  the  dissimilar (24%) threats.  The  predictive superiority of efficacy expectations over  past  performance is  significant  for  total

Figure  4. Probability  of  successful  performance  of  any  given  task as a  function of strength of self-efficacy. The  figure  on  the  left  shows  the  relationship  for  vicarious  and  enactive  treatments; the  figure  on  the  right  shows  the  relationship  between  strength of  self-efficacy and  successful approach  responses toward  similar  and  dissimilar  threats  combined  across  treatments  (Bandura  et  al., in  press).

<!-- image -->

approach  behavior  and  for approach  behavior toward the dissimilar threat. These differential findings indicate that experienced mastery altered subjects' sense  of  personal efficacy rather than merely providing  behavioral  cues  for  judgments  of self-efficacy.

The  theory  also  accounts  for  variations  in behavioral change produced by modeling alone.  To  equate for  duration  of  treatment, subjects in the modeling condition were yoked  to  matched  counterparts in participant modeling,  who  received  treatment  until  they performed all the therapeutic tasks. The subjects  in  the  participant modeling  condition  varied  in  the  time  they  required  to  complete  treatment, so  some  of  the subjects  in the  modeling  conditions  had  only brief  exposure  to successful performances,  whereas others  had the benefit  of  observing feared activities modeled repeatedly without any untoward consequences. The findings are consistent  with  hypothesized  increases in  selfefficacy as a function of repeated observation  of  successful  modeling.  Brief exposure produced  limited  increases  in  the  level  (9%) and  strength (5%)  of  efficacy expectations and correspondingly little behavior change (10%).  In  contrast,  repeated  observation  of successful  performances  increased  by  a  substantial  amount the level  (44%)  and  strength (38%)  of  self-efficacy which,  in turn,  was accompanied by  similarly large increments in  performance  (35%).

## Comparison  of Self-efficacy and  Dual-Process Theory

As  a  further  test  of  the  generality  of  the theory  under  discussion,  a  microanalysis  was conducted of efficacy expectations instated by desensitization procedures, which are aimed  at  reducing  emotional arousal. Social learning  theory  and  the  dual-process theory of  anxiety,  on  which  the  desensitization  approach is  based,  posit different explanatory mechanisms  for the changes  accompanying this  mode of treatment.  The  alternative views therefore  give  rise  to  differential  predictions that  can  be readily  tested.

The  standard desensitization approach is based on the  assumption that anxiety  activates defensive behavior (Wolpe, 1974). According  to  this  view, association  of  neutral events  with  aversive  stimulation  creates  an anxiety drive  that motivates defensive behavior; the defensive  behavior, in turn,  is reinforced by  reducing  the  anxiety  aroused by conditioned  aversive  stimuli.  Hence, to eliminate defensive responding, it is considered  necessary  to  eradicate  its underlying anxiety.  Treatment  strategies  are therefore keyed to reduction of emotional arousal. Aversive  stimuli  are  presented  at  graduated levels in conjunction  with relaxation until anxiety reactions to the threats are eliminated.

Although desensitization produces behavioral  changes, there  is  little  evidence  to support  the  original  rationale  that  defensive behavior is diminished because anxiety is eliminated  either  by  reciprocal  physiological inhibition or by associative recoupling  of threatening stimuli to relaxation.  Desensitization  does  not  require graduated exposure, and anxiety-reducing  activities  are  at  most  facilitory,  not  necessary, conditions for eliminating defensive  behavior (Bandura,  1969;  Wilson &amp; Davison,  1971).

The principal assumption that  defensive behavior  is  controlled  by  anxiety  arousal is also disputed by several lines of evidence. Autonomic arousal, which constitutes the principal  index  of  anxiety,-is  not necessary for  defensive  learning. Because autonomic  reactions  take  much  longer  to  activate  than  do avoidance responses, the latter cannot be caused  by  the  former.  Studies  in  which autonomic  and  avoidance  responses  are  measured concurrently  indicate  that  these  two  modes of  activity  may  be partially  correlated  in  the acquisition  phase but are not causally related  (Black,  1965).  Avoidance behavior,  for example, can persist long after autonomic reactions  to  threats  have  been  extinguished. Surgical  removal  of  autonomic  feedback capability in  animals  has  little effect on the acquisition  of  avoidance  responses  (Rescorla &amp; Solomon, 1967). Maintenance  of  avoidance behavior  is even less  dependent  on  autonomic feedback.  Once  defensive  behavior  has  been learned,  depriving animals  of autonomic  feed-

back  does  not  hasten  the  rate  at  which  such activities  are  extinguished.

Research casts doubt  on the postulated reinforcement  sources,  as  well  as  the  activating sources, of defensive  behavior. In the dual-process theory, the anxiety reduction occasioned by  escape from the feared stimulus  presumably  reinforces  the  defensive behavior.  The  evidence,  however,  reveals  that whether  or  not defensive  behavior  removes the feared stimulus  has variable effects  on the maintenance of the behavior (Bolles, 1972a).  Moreover,  defensive behavior  can  be acquired and maintained by  its success  in diminishing  the frequency  of  aversive stimulation, even though there are no feared stimuli  to  arouse  anxiety  and  to  provide  the source  of  decremental  reinforcement  (Herrnstein, 1969).  The  substantial  negative evidence concerning an anxiety mediational mechanism  in avoidance behavior suggests that  the effects of  desensitization treatment must  result  from some  other  mechanism  of operation.

Social  learning  theory  regards  anxiety  and defensive  behavior  as  coeffects  rather  than  as causally linked (Bandura, 1977).  Aversive experiences,  either  of  a  personal  or  vicarious sort,  create  expectations of  injurious effects that  can  activate  both  fear  and  defensive  behavior. Being coeffects, there is no fixed relationship between  autonomic  arousal  and actions.  Until  effective  coping  behaviors  are achieved, perceived threats produce high emotional arousal and various defensive maneuvers. But  after  people  become adept  at self-protective  behaviors,  they  perform  them in  potentially threatening  situations  without having  to  be  frightened  (Notterman et  al., 1952).  Should  their  habitual  coping  devices fail,  they  experience  heightened  arousal  until new  defensive  learning  reduces  their  vulner- ability.

Perceived threats activate defensive  behavior because of their predictive value  rather than their aversive quality. That  is,  when formerly  neutral  stimuli  are  associated  with painful  experiences,  it  is  not  that  the  stimuli have become  aversive but that individuals have learned to anticipate aversive consequences.  It is  people's  knowledge  of  their environment, not the stimuli, that are changed by correlated experience. Stimuli having predictive significance signal the likelihood of painful consequences unless protective  measures  are  taken.  Defensive behavior,  in  turn,  is  maintained  by  its  success in  forestalling or  reducing  the  occurrence of aversive events. Once  established, self-protective  behavior  is  difficult  to  eliminate  even though  the  hazards  no  longer  exist.  This  is because  consistent  avoidance  prevents  a  person  from  learning that  the  real-life  conditions have  changed.  Hence,  the  nonoccurrence  of anticipated  hazards  reinforces  the  expectation that the defensive maneuvers forestalled them.

From the perspective of dual-process theory,  thorough  extinction of  anxiety  should eliminate  avoidance  behavior. In  the  desensitization  treatment,  however, anxiety reactions are  typically extinguished  to  visualized  representations  of  feared  situations.  One  would expect  some  transfer loss  of  extinction  effects from symbolic  to  real-life threats,  as  is  indeed  the  case (Agras,  1967; Barlow  et  al., 1969).  It is  not  uncommon  for  people to fear  and  avoid real-life situations  to  which they have been desensitized in imagery. Therefore,  according  to  this  view,  thorough extinction of anxiety to visualized threats should  produce  substantial,  though  less  than complete, reductions  in defensive  behavior. However, dual-process theory provides no basis for  predicting  either the level of  behavior  change  or  the  variability  in  behavior displayed by subjects who  have all been equally  desensitized.

In the social learning  analysis presented earlier, reducing physiological arousal improves  performance  by raising efficacy expectations  rather  than  by  eliminating a  drive that  instigates the  defensive  behavior.  This information-based view of the mediating mechanism predicts that the higher and stronger  the  efficacy  expectations  instated  by desensitization procedures, the greater are the  reductions  in  defensive  behavior.  Because arousal is only one of several sources of efficacy  information, and  not  necessarily the most dependable  one,  extinguishing  anxiety

Figure 5. Level of efficacy expectations and approach behavior displayed by subjects toward different threats after their emotional reactions  to  symbolic  representations of feared activities were  eliminated through  systematic  desensitization. (Bandura  &amp; Adams,  in  press.)

<!-- image -->

arousal is rarely a sufficient condition for eliminating  defensive  behavior.

To  test the theory that desensitization changes behavior through its intervening effects  on  efficacy  expectations,  severe  snake phobics were administered the standard desensitization treatment until their emotional  reactions were  completely extinguished to imaginal representations of the most aversive scenes  (Bandura &amp; Adams, in press). The  assessment  procedures  were  identical  to those  used  in  the  preceding  experiment. Subjects'  approach  behavior  was  tested  on  the series  of  performance  tasks  before  and after the desensitization treatment. The level, strength, and generality of their efficacy expectations  were  similarly  measured  before treatment,  upon  completion  of  treatment  but prior  to  the  posttest,  and  following  the  posttest.

The findings show that phobics whose anxiety  reactions  to  visualized  threats  have been thoroughly extinguished emerge from the desensitization treatment with widely differing efficacy expectations. As depicted graphically in Figure 5,  performance  corresponds  closely  to  level  of  self-efficacy. The higher  the subjects'  level  of  perceived self- efficacy at the end  of  treatment, the  more approach behavior they subsequently performed  in  the  posttest  assessment (r  .74).

Results  of  the  microanalysis  of  congruence between  self-efficacy  at  the  end  of  treatment and  performance  on  each  of  the tasks administered  in  the  posttest  are  consistent  with the  findings  obtained from  enactive  and  vicarious treatment. Self-efficacy was  an accurate  predictor  of  subsequent  performance on  85%  for  all  the  tasks,  and  83%  for  the subset  of  tasks  that  subjects  were  unable  to perform  in  the  pretest  assessment. Subjects successfully  executed  tasks  within  the  range of their  perceived self-efficacy produced  by the  desensitization  treatment,  whereas they failed at tasks  they  perceived  to  be  beyond their capabilities.

## Microanalysis oj Self-efficacy and Performance During  the  Process of  Change

The preceding series of experiments  examined  the  predictive  value  of  self-efficacy at the completion  of  different modes  of treatment. A further  study investigated  the  process of  efficacy  and  behavioral  change  during  the course  of  treatment  itself. Participant  model-

ing  was selected  for  this  purpose  because  the amount  of  treatment can  be  well-regulated and  it  promotes  rapid  change.

As  in  the  previous  studies,  adults  whose lives  were adversely  affected  by  severe  snake phobias  were tested  for  their  efficacy  expectations  and  approach  behavior  using  the  microanalytic  methodology  described  earlier.  The various  treatment activities  were  segmented into natural blocks of tasks of increasing difficulty  and threat value. Items  in the initial block included looking at a snake from progressively closer distances; intermediate blocks required subjects  to  touch and  to  hold the  snake  with  gloved  and bare  hands  for increasing intervals; the  terminal  block required  them  to  tolerate the  snake  crawling about freely in their laps for  an  extended period. Subjects received the participant modeling treatment only for the block  of items  they  failed  in  the  hierarchy  of  assessment  tasks.  Treatment  was  continued  until they could perform the activities in the failed  block,  whereupon they  were  tested  for their efficacy expectations  and  approach responses on the succeeding tasks. Subjects who  attained  terminal  performances received no  further  treatment.  For  those  who achieved only  partial  improvement,  the sequence  of treatment on the failed block followed by assessments  of  self-efficacy  and  approach  behavior on succeeding blocks was repeated  until they  achieved  terminal performances.

Findings  of  the  microanalysis  lend  further support to  the  postulated cognitive  mechanism  of  change.  Subjects  who  mastered the same  intermediate  performances  during the course  of treatment varied considerably in their  behavioral  attainments when  tested  on succeeding  blocks  of  tasks.  Past  performance was  therefore  of  limited  value  in  predicting what  subjects  would be able  to  do when  confronted  with more threatening tasks. However, efficacy  judgments proved  to  be  good  predictors  of  degree  of  behavioral  change  resulting from  partial  mastery  experiences.  Self-efficacy predicted subsequent performance  as measured  at  different  points  in  treatment  in  92% of  the total  assessment  tasks. This  relationship holds even when the  measure of congruence is based  only  on  the  subset of  activities that subjects  could not  perform  in  pretest  because they  found  them  too threatening, and  did  not perform in  treatment because the activities extended  beyond  the failed block.  Expectations of personal  effectiveness  formed  through partial  mastery  experiences during the  course of treatment predicted,  at a  84%  level  of accuracy,  performance  on  highly  threatening

tasks  that  subjects  had  never  done  before.

## Concluding  Remarks

The  present  theoretical  formulation orders variations  in  the  level  of  behavioral  changes produced  by  different  modes of  treatment;  it accounts  for  behavioral  variations  displayed by individuals  receiving the same type  of treatment;  and  it  predicts  performance successes  at  the  level  of  individual  tasks during and  after  treatment.  It  is possible to  generate alternative explanations  for  particular subsets  of  data,  but  the  mechanism  proposed  in the present  theory appears  to account  equally well  for the  different  sets of findings. It  might be argued, for example, that self-efficacy proved  to  be  an  accurate predictor  of  performance  in  the  enactive  mode  of  treatment because  subjects  were  simply  judging  their future  performance from  their  past  behavior. However,  an  interpretation  of  this  type  has no  explanatory  value  for  the  vicarious  and emotive  treatments,  in  which  perceived  selfefficacy  was  an  equally  accurate  predictor  of performance  although subjects engaged  in  no overt  behavior.  Even  in  the  enactive  treatment,  perceived  self-efficacy proved  to  be  a better predictor of behavior toward  unfamiliar threats than did  past  performance.  Moreover, self-efficacy derived  from partial enactive mastery during the  course of treatment predicted  performance on  stressful  tasks  that the  individuals had  never  done  before.

As  an alternative explanation,  one  could invoke  a  superordinate  mediator that controls  both  efficacy  expectations and  behavior. Although  such  a  possibility  is  not  inconceivable,  the  mediator  would  have  to  be  an  exceedingly  complex one  to  account  adequately for the  diverse  sets  of  relationships.  To  cite but  a  few  examples,  it  would  have  to affect differentially efficacy expectations and be-

havior  resulting  from  maximal  enactive  mastery; somehow,  it would  have to  produce different levels  of self-efficacy from  equivalent  reductions  in  emotional  arousal;  and  it would have to generate some  variation in efficacy expectations from similar partial mastery experiences.  The theory  presented here posits a central processor of efficacy information.  That  is,  people process,  weigh, and  integrate  diverse  sources  of  information concerning  their  capability,  and  they  regulate their  choice  behavior  and effort  expenditure accordingly.

Evidence that people develop  somewhat different efficacy expectations from similar enactive  mastery and  fear  extinction warrants comment.  One  possible  explanation for the variance  is  in  terms  of  differential  cognitive processing  of  efficacy  information.  To  the  extent  that  individuals  differ  in  how  they  cognitively appraise  their  arousal decrements and behavioral attainments, their percepts of self-efficacy will  vary  to  some  degree.  A  second  possibility  concerns  the  multiple  determination  of  self-efficacy.  Because  people have met with different types and amounts  of efficacy-altering experiences,  providing one new  source of  efficacy  information would  not be expected to affect everyone uniformly. Thus,  for  example,  extinguishing  arousal to threats will  enhance  self-efficacy, but  more so  in  individuals whose past  coping  attempts have occasionally succeeded  than in those who have consistently  failed.

The  research  completed  thus  far  has  tested the predictive power of the conceptual scheme for efficacy expectations  developed  through enactive,  vicarious,  and emotive-based  procedures.  Additional tests  of  the  generality  of this  approach  need  to  be  extended  to  efficacy expectations arising from verbal persuasion and  from  other  types  of  treatments  aimed  at reducing  emotional  arousal.

Cognitive  processing of efficacy information,  which  is  an  important  component  function  in  the  proposed  theory,  is  an  especially relevant  area  for  research.  A  number  of  factors  were  identified  as  influencing the  cognitive  appraisal  of  efficacy  information  conveyed  by  each  of  the  major  sources  of  selfefficacy. Previous research from a  number of different perspectives  demonstrating that some  of  these  factors  affect attitudinal  and behavioral  changes  has  suggestive  value.  But it  is  investigations  that  include  assessment of the  intervening self-efficacy  link  that  can  best provide  validity  for  the  present  theory.

The  operative  process  involved in  the  relationship between efficacy expectations and action also  requires further  investigation.  It will  be  recalled  that  efficacy  expectations  are presumed  to influence  level  of  performance by enhancing intensity and persistence of effort. In the preceding experiments, the behavioral tasks were  ordered in level  of difficulty and subjects either persisted in their efforts until  they  completed  all  of  the tasks  or  they  quit  at  varying  points along the  way.  The number  of  tasks successfully completed  reflects degree of  perseverance.  As a further step  toward elucidating  the  intervening  process, it would  be  of  interest to measure  the  intensity  and  duration  of effort subjects  exert  in  attempts  to  master  arduous or  insoluble  tasks  as  a  function  of  the  level and strength  of their efficacy expectations. Further  research  on  the  processes  postulated in  the  present  theoretical  formulation should increase our  understanding of  the relationship between cognitive and  behavioral change.

## References

Agras,  W.  S.  Transfer during  systematic desensitization therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1967, 5, 193-199.

Averill,  J. R.  Personal  control  over  aversive  stimuli and its  relationship to stress. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 80, 286-303.

Bandura, A. Principles of behavior modification. New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart  &amp; Winston,  1969.

Bandura, A. (Ed.). Psychological modeling: Conflicting theories. Chicago:  Aldine-Atherton,  1971.

- Bandura, A. Effecting change  through participant modeling.  In  J.  D.  Krumboltz  &amp; C.  E.  Thoresen (Eds.), Counseling methods. New  York: Holt, Rinehart  &amp; Winston, 1976. (a)

Bandura, A. Self-reinforcement: Theoretical and methodological  considerations. Behaviorism, 1976, 4, 135-155.  (b)

Bandura, A. Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1977.

Bandura,  A.,  &amp; Adams, N.  E.  Analysis  of self-efficacy theory of behavioral change. Cognitive Therapy and  Research, in  press.

Bandura,  A.,  Adams,  N.  E.,  &amp; Beyer, J. Cognitive

- processes  mediating  behavioral  changes. Journal  of Personality and  Social  Psychology, in  press.
- Bandura, A.,  &amp;  Barab, P. G. Processes  governing disinhibitory effects through symbolic  modeling. Journal of  Abnormal  Psychology, 1973, 82, 1-9.
- Bandura, A., Blanchard, E. B., &amp;  Ritter, B. The relative efficacy of desensitization and  modeling approaches for inducing behavioral, affective, and attitudinal changes. Journal of Personality and  Social  Psychology, 1969, 13, 173-199.
- Bandura,  A.,  Jeffery, R.  W.,  &amp;  Gajdos,  E.  Generalizing change through  participant modeling  with self-directed mastery. 'Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1975, 13, 141-152.
- Bandura, A., Jeffery, R. W., &amp;  Wright, C. L. Efficacy of participant modeling as a function of response  induction  aids. Journal of  Abnormal Psychology, 1974, 83, 56-64.
- Bandura,  A.,  &amp;  Menlove,  F.  L.  Factors  determining vicarious  extinction  of  avoidance  behavior through symbolic modeling. Journal of Personality and Social  Psychology, 1968,  «,  99-108.
- Barlow, D. H., Leitenberg, H., Agras,  W. S.,  &amp; Wincze, J. P. The transfer gap in systematic desensitization:  An  analogue study. Behaviour  Research  and  Therapy, 1969, 7,  191-196.
- Baron,  A.,  Kaufman, A.,  &amp; Stauber,  K.  A.  Effects  of instructions and reinforcement-feedback  on human  operant  behavior maintained  by fixed-interval .reinforcement. Journal of  the  Experimental Analysis  of  Behavior, 1969, 12, 701-712.
- Baum,  W.  M.  The correlation-based  law of effect. Journal of  the  Experimental Analysis of  Behavior, 1973, 20, 137-153.
- Bern,  D.  J.  Self-perception  theory.  In  L.  Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in  experimental social  psychology (Vol.  6).  New  York:  Academic Press, 1972.
- Black) A. H. Cardiac conditioning in curarized dogs: The relationship between heart rate and skeletal behaviour. In W. F. Prokasy (Ed.), Classical  conditioning:  A  symposium. New  York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1965.
- Blanchard, E. B. The generalization of vicarious extinction effects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1970, 7, 323-330. (a)
- Blanchard,  E. B. Relative contributions of  modeling, informational  influences, and physical  contact  in  extinction  of  phobic  behavior. Journal of Abnormal  Psychology, 1970, 76, 55-61. (b)
- Bolles, R. C.  The avoidance learning  problem. In G.  Bower (Ed.), The psychology of  learning  and motivation (Vol.  6).  New  York: Academic  Press, 1972. (a)
- Bolles,  R.  C.  Reinforcement,  expectancy,  and learning. Psychological  Review, 1972, 79, 394-409.  (b)
- Borkovec,  T.  D.  The  role  of  expectancy  and  physiological  feedback  in  fear  research:  A  review  with special reference to subject characteristics. Behavior Therapy, 1973, 4, 491-505.
- Bootzin,  R.  R.,  Herman,  C.  P.,  &amp; Nicassio,  P.  The power of suggestion: Another examination of misattribution and insomnia. Journal of Personality and  Social  Psychology, 1976, 34, 673-679.
- Calvert-Boyanowsky,  J.,  &amp;  Leventhal, H.  The role of  information in  attenuating behavioral  responses to  stress: A  reinterpretation of  the  misattribution phenomenon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 214-221.
- Davison,  G.  C.,  &amp;  Wilson,  G.  T.  Processes  of fearreduction in  systematic desensitization: Cognitive and social  reinforcement  factors  in  humans. Behavior  Therapy, 1973, 4, 1-21.
- Dawson,  M.  E.,  &amp; Furedy,  J.  J.  The  role  of  awareness  in  human  differential  autonomic classical  conditioning: The necessary-gate hypothesis. Psychophysiology, 1976, 13, 50-53.
- Dulany,  D. E. Awareness,  rules, and prepositional control: A confrontation with S-R behavior theory. In  T.  R.  Dixon  &amp;  D.  L.  Horton (Eds.), Verbal behavior and general behavior theory. Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall,  1968.
- Emmelkamp,  P.  M. G.,  &amp; Wessels,  H. Flooding  in imagination vs.  flooding in  vivo: A  comparison with agoraphobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1975, 13, 7-15.
- Estes,  W. K. Reinforcement in human behavior. American Scientist, 1972, 60, 723-729.
- Flanders, J. P. A  review  of research on  imitative behavior. Psychological  Bulletin, 1968, 69, 316-337.
- Gaupp,  L. A., Stern, R. M.,  &amp;  Galbraith, G. G. False heart-rate feedback and reciprocal inhibition  by aversion relief in  the  treatment  of  snake avoidance behavior Behavior Therapy, 1972, 3, 7-20.
- Grings,  W.  W.  The  role  of  consciousness and  cognition  in  autonomic  behavior  change.  In  F.  J.  McGuigan &amp;  R. A. Schoonover (Eds.), The psychophysiology of thinking. New  York: Academic Press,  1973.
- Heneman,  H.  G.,  Ill,  &amp; Schwab,  D.  P.  Evaluation of research on expectancy theory predictions of employee performance Psychological Bulletin, 1972, 78, 1-9.
- Herrnstein,  R.  J. Method  and  theory  in  the  study of  avoidance. Psychological  Review, 1969, 76, 4969.
- Hewlett, S. C., &amp;  Nawas, M. M. Exposure to aversive imagery and suggestion in systematic desensitization.  In  R.  D.  Rubin, A. A.  Lazarus,  H. Fensterheim, &amp;  C M. Franks (Eds.), Advances in  behavior therapy. New  York:  Academic  Press, 1971.
- Hunt,  J. McV., Cole, M.  W., &amp;  Reis, E. E. S. Situational cues distinguishing anger, fear, and sorrow. American  Journal of  Psychology, 1958, 71, 136-151.
- Irwin,  F.  W. Intentional behavior and  motivation:
- A cognitive  view. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1971. Kaufman,  A.,  Baron,  A.,  &amp;  Kopp, E.  Some effects of instructions  on  human  operant  behavior. Psychonomic  Monograph Supplements, 1966, 1, 243250.
- Kazdin,  A.  E.  Covert  modeling  and  the  reduction of avoidance behavior. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1973, 81, 87-95.
- Kazdin, A.  E. Comparative  effects of  some  varia-

- tions of covert modeling. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 1974, 5, 225-232.  (a)
- Kazdin, A.  E. Covert modeling, model similarity, and reduction of avoidance behavior. Behavior Therapy, 1974, 5,  325-340. (b)
- Kazdin,  A.  E. Effects of  covert  modeling  and reinforcement on assertive behavior. Journal of Abnormal  Psychology, 1974, 83, 240-252.  (c)
- Kazdin,  A.  E.  Covert  modeling,  imagery  assessment, and assertive behavior. Journal of Consulting and  Clinical  Psychology, 1975, 43, 716-724.
- Kazdin,  A.  E. Effects of  covert  modeling,  multiple models,  and  model  reinforcement  on  assertive  behavior. Behavior Therapy, 1976, 7, 211-222.
- Kellogg, R., &amp;  Baron, R. S. Attribution theory, insomnia, and the reverse placebo effect: A  reversal of  Storms  and Nisbett's findings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 231-236.
- Kent,  R.  N.,  Wilson,  G.  T.,  &amp; Nelson,  R.  Effects  of false heart-rate feedback on  avoidance  behavior: An investigation of "cognitive desensitization." Behavior Therapy, 1972, 3, 1-6.
- Kopel,  S.,  &amp;  Arkowitz, H. The  role  of  attribution and  self-perception  in  behavior  change: Implications for behavior therapy. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 1975, 92, 175-212.
- Lewis,  S.  A  comparison of  behavior therapy techniques  in the reduction  of fearful avoidance  behavior. Behavior Therapy, 1974, 5, 648-655.
- Lick, J., &amp;  Bootzin,  R.  Expectancy  factors in the treatment  of  fear: Methodological  and  theoretical issues. Psychological  Bulletin, 1975, 82, 917-931.
- Litvak, S. B. A  comparison of two brief group behavior  therapy techniques  on the reduction  of avoidance behavior. The Psychological Record, 1969, 19, 329-334.
- LoPiccolo, J. Effective components of systematic desensitization (Doctoral dissertation, Yale University,  1969). Dissertation  Abstracts International, 1970, 31, 1543B.  (University  Microfilms  No.  7016300)
- Maier, S.  F.,  &amp;  Seligman,  M.  E. Learned  helplessness: Theory and evidence. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1976, 105, 3-46.
- Mandler,  G. Mind and  emotion. New  York:  Wiley, 1975.
- McGlynn,  F.  D.,  &amp; Mapp,  R.  H.  Systematic  desensitization of snake-avoidance following three types of suggestion. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1970, 8, 197-201.
- McGlynn,  F.  D.,  Mealiea,  W.  L.,  &amp; Nawas,  M.  M. Systematic desensitization of snake-avoidance under  two conditions  of  suggestion. Psychological Reports, 1969, 25, 220-222.
- McGlynn,  F.  D.,  Reynolds,  E.  J.,  &amp; Linder,  L.  H. Systematic  desensitization  with  pre-treatment  and intra-treatment  therapeutic  instructions. Behaviour Research  and Therapy, 1971, P, 57-63.
- Meichenbaum,  D.  H. Examination of  model characteristics  in  reducing avoidance  behavior. Journal
- of Personality and Social  Psychology, 1971, 17, 298-307.
- Moore,  N.  Behaviour  therapy  in  bronchial  asthma: A controlled study. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 1965, 9, 257-276.
- Nisbett,  R.  E.,  &amp;  Schachter,  S.  Cognitive  manipulation  of  pain. Journal of  Experimental Social  Psychology, 1966, 2, 227-236.
- Notterman, J. M., Schoenfeld,  W. N., &amp;  Bersh, P.  J.  A  comparison  of  three  extinction  procedures following  heart  rate  conditioning. Journal of  Abnormal  and  Social  Psychology, 1952, 47, 674-677.
- Paul, G.  L. Insight vs. desensitization in psychotherapy. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,  1966.
- Rabavilas,  A.  D.,  Boulougouris,  J. C.,  &amp; Stefanis,  C. Duration of  flooding  sessions  in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive patients. Behaviour Research  and  Therapy, 1976, 14, 349-355.
- Rescorla, R. A., &amp;  Solomon, R. L. Two-process learning  theory:  Relationships  between  Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental learning. Psychological  Review, 1967, 74, 151-182.
- Ritter,  B.  The  use  of  contact  desensitization, demonstration-plus-participation, and demonstration alone  in the  treatment of  acrophobia. Behaviour Research  and  Therapy, 1969, 7, 157-164.
- Roper,  G.,  Rachman, S.,  &amp;  Marks, I.  Passive  and participant modelling in exposure treatment of obsessive-compulsive  neurotics. Behaviour Research and  Therapy, 1975, 13, 271-279.
- Rosen,  G.  M.,  Rosen,  E.,  &amp;  Reid,  J. B.  Cognitive desensitization and avoidance behavior: A reevaluation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1972, 80, 176-182.
- Ross,  L.,  Rodin,  J.,  &amp;  Zimbardo,  P.  T.  Toward  an attribution therapy:  The  reduction  of  fear  through induced cognitive-emotional  misattribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 12, 279-288.
- Rotter, J. B.  Generalized expectancies for  internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 1966, #0(1, Whole No. 609).
- Sarason, I. G.  Anxiety  and self-preoccupation.  In I.  G.  Sarason  &amp; C.  D.  Spielberger  (Eds.), Stress and anxiety (Vol.  2). Washington, D.C.: Hemisphere, 1976.
- Schachter, S. The interaction of cognitive and physiological determinants of emotional state. In  L.  Berkowitz  (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology. New York: Academic Press, 1964.
- Schachter,  S.,  &amp;  Singer,  J. E.  Cognitive,  social,  and physiological determinants of emotional state. Psychological  Review, 1962, 69, 379-399.
- Sherman, A. R., Real-life exposure  as a primary therapeutic factor in the desensitization treatment  of fear. Journal of  Abnormal Psychology, 1972, 79, 19-28.
- Singerman,  K.  J.,  Borkovec,  T.  D.,  &amp; Baron,  R.  S. Failure of  a "misattribution therapy"  manipula-

- tion  with a clinically relevant target behavior. Behavior  Therapy, 1976, 7, 306-313.
- Stern,  R.,  &amp; Marks,  I.  Brief  and  prolonged  flooding: A comparison  in agoraphobic patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1973, 28, 270-276.
- Strahley, D. F. Systematic desensitization and ·counterphobic  treatment of  an irrational fear  of snakes  (Doctoral dissertation, University of  Tennessee, 196S). Dissertation Abstracts, 1966, 27, 973B. (University Microfilms  No. 66-5366)
- Sushinsky, L. W., &amp;  Bootzin, R. R. Cognitive desensitization as  a  model  of  systematic desensitization. Behaviour Research  and Therapy, 1970, 8, 29-33.
- Szpiler, J. A., &amp;  Epstein, S. Availability of an avoidance response as related to autonomic arousal. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1976, 85, 73-82.
- Thase,  M.  E.,  &amp; Moss,  M.  K.  The  relative  efficacy  of covert  modeling  procedures  and  guided  participant modeling  in  the  reduction  of  avoidance behavior. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 1976,  7, 7-12.
- Valins, S., &amp;  Nisbett, R. E. Attribution processes
- in the development and treatment of emotional disorders, Morristown, N.J.: General Learning Press,  1971.
- Valins,  S.,  &amp;  Ray, A.  Effects of cognitive  desensitization on avoidance behaviour. Journal of Personality and  Social  Psychology, 1967,  7, 345350.
- Watson,  J. P., Mullett, G.  E.,  &amp;  Pillay,  H.  The effects of  prolonged  exposure  to  phobic  situations upon  agoraphobic  patients  treated  in  groups. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1973, 11, 531545.
- Weiner, B. Theories of motivation. Chicago: Markham, 1972.
- White, R.  W.  Motivation reconsidered: The concept of  competence. Psychological  Review, 1959, 66, 297-333.
- Wilson,  G.  T., &amp; Davison,  G. C.  Processes  of fear reduction in systematic desensitization: Animal studies. Psychological  Bulletin, 1971, 76, 1-14.
- Wolpe,  J. The practice of behavior therapy. New York:  Pergamon  Press,  1974.

Received June 30, 1976  •