## Human Agency in  Social Cognitive Theory

Albert Bandura

ABSTRACT:  The  present article  xamines  the nature and function of human agency  within the  conceptual model  of triadic reciprocal causation. In  analyzing the  operation of  human  agency  in  this interactional causal  structure, social cognitive theory accords a central role to  cognitive, vicarious, self-reflective, and  self-regulatory processes. The issues addressed concern  the  psychological mechanisms through  which  personal agency  is  exercised, the  hierarchical structure of self-regulatory systems, eschewal of the dichotomous  construal of self as  agent and  self as  object, and the  properties of  a nondualistic but  nonreductional conception of  human  agency.  The  relation of  agent  causality to  the fundamental  issues of freedom  and determinism is also analyzed.

The recent years have  witnessed a resurgence of  interest in  the  self-referent phenomena.  One can  point to  several reasons why self processes have  come to  pervade  many domains  of  psychology. Self-generated activities lie at  the very  heart of  causal processes. They not  only  contribute to  the  meaning  and  valence of  most  external influences, but  they  also  function as  important proximal  determinants  of  motivation and action. The capacity to  exercise control over  one's  own  thought  processes, motivation, and  action is a  distinctively human characteristic. Because judgments  and  actions are  partly self-determined, people can effect change in themselves  and their  situations through  their own efforts. In  this article, I  will examine the  mechanisms of  human  agency  through  which such changes  are  realized.

Stanford University forces, the  self system  is merely  a  repository and  conduit for them.  In  this conception of  agency, self-referent processes are  epiphenominal by-products of  conditioned responses that do  not  enter into the  determination of  action. For  the  material eliminativist, self-influences do  not  exist. People  are  not  intentional cognizers with  a capacity to influence their own motivation and action; rather, they are  neurophysiological computational machines.  Such views  fail to  explain the  demonstrable explanatory and predictive power of  self-referent factors that supposedly are  devoid  of  causal efficacy or  do not  even  exist.

Social  cognitive theory  subscribes to a model of emergent  interactive agency  (Bandura, 1986). Persons are neither autonomous  agents nor  simply  mechanical conveyers  of  animating  environmental influences. Rather, they  make causal  contribution to  their own motivation and  action within a  system  of triadic reciprocal causation. In  this model of  reciprocal causation, action, cognitive, affective, and other personal factors, and environmental events  all operate as  interacting determinants. Any account  of  the  determinants of  human action must,  therefore, include self-generated influences as  a contributing factor. Empirical tests of  the  model  of  triadic reciprocal causation are  presented elsewhere  and will  not  be reviewed  here  (Wood  &amp;  Bandura,  in  press). The focus  of this article is on  the  mechanisms  through which  personal agency  operates within the  interactional causal structure.

## Exercise of  Agency Through Self-Belief of  Efficacy

## The Nature  and Locus of  Human  Agency

The manner in  which human  agency  operates has  been conceptualized in  at  least three different ways--as either autonomous agency, mechanical agency, or emergent  interactive agency. The notion that humans serve as  entirely independent agents  of  their own actions has  few,  if any, serious advocates. However,  environmental determinists sometimes  invoke  the  view  of autonomous  agency  in  arguments  designed to  repudiate any  role of  self-influence in  causal processes.

Among  the  mechanisms  of personal agency, none  is more central or  pervasive than  people's beliefs about  their capabilities to  exercise control over  events that affect their lives. Self-efficacy beliefs function as  an  important set of proximal determinants of  human motivation, affect, and action. They operate  on action  through  motivational, cognitive, and affective intervening processes. Some  of these  processes, such as  affective arousal  and thinking patterns, are  of  considerable interest in  their own right and not  just as  intervening influencers of  action.

A  second  approach  to  the  self system  is to  treat it in  terms  of  mechanical agency.  It  is  an internal instrumentality  through  which  external influences operate mechanistically on action, but  it does  not  itself have  any motivative, self-reflective, self-reactive, creative, or  selfdirective properties. In this  view,  internal events  are mainly  products of  external ones  devoid  of  any causal efficacy. Because the  agency resides in environmental

## Cognitive Processes

Self-efficacy beliefs affect thought  patterns that  may be self-aiding or  self-hindering. These  cognitive effects take various  forms.  Much  human  behavior is  regulated by forethought embodying  cognized goals, and  personal goal setting is  influenced by  self-appraisal of  capabilities. The stronger their perceived self-efficacy, the  higher the  goals people set for themselves and  the  firmer their commitment

to  them  (Locke, Frederick, Lee,  &amp; Bobko, 1984; Taylor, Locke,  Lee,  &amp; Gist, 1984; Wood  &amp; Bandura,  in  press). As I  will show later, challenging goals  raise the  level of motivation and  performance attainments (Locke, Shaw, Saari, &amp; Latham,  1981; Mento,  Steel, &amp; Karren,  1987).

A major  function of  thought is to  enable people to predict the  occurrence of  events and  to  create the  means for  exercising control over  those  that affect their daily lives. Many activities involve inferential judgments about conditional relations between  events in  probabilistic environments. Discernment  of  predictive rules  requires cognitive processing of  multidimensional information that contains many ambiguities and  uncertainties. In  ferreting out  predictive rules, people  must  draw on their state of knowledge  to generate hypotheses about predictive factors, to  weight and  integrate them  into composite rules, to  test their judgments against outcome  information, and to  remember  which  notions they had  tested and  how well they had  worked.  It requires a strong sense  of efficacy to remain  task oriented in  the face  of judgmental failures. Indeed, people  who believe strongly in  their problemsolving capabilities remain  highly efficient in their analytic thinking in  complex  decision-making situations, whereas those who are  plagued by  self-doubts are  erratic in  their analytic thinking (Bandura &amp; Wood, 1989; Wood &amp; Bandura, 1989). Quality of  analytic thinking, in  turn, affects performance accomplishments.

People's perceptions of  their efficacy influence the types of  anticipatory scenarios they  construct and reiterate. Those  who have  a  high  sense  of  efficacy visualize success scenarios that provide positive guides for performance.  Those  who judge  themselves as  inefficacious are more inclined to  visualize failure scenarios that undermine performance  by dwelling on how things will  go wrong.  Cognitive simulations in  which  individuals visualize themselves executing activities skillfully enhance subsequent performance (Bandura, 1986; Corbin,  1972; Feltz &amp; Landers, 1983; Kazdin,  1978; Markus,  Cross, &amp; Wurf,  in  press). Perceived self-efficacy and  cognitive simulation affect each  other bidirectionally. A high  sense  of efficacy fosters cognitive constructions of effective actions, and  cognitive reiteration f  efficacious courses of  action strengthens self-perceptions of efficacy (Bandura &amp; Adams, 1977; Kazdin,  1979),

## Motivational Processes

People's self-efficacy beliefs determine their level of  motivation, as  reflected in  how much effort hey  will exert in  an  endeavor and  how long  they will persevere in  the face  of  obstacles. The stronger the  belief in  their capabilities, the  greater and  more persistent are  their efforts (Bandura,  1988a). When  faced with  difficulties, people who  are  beset  by self-doubts about  their capabilities slacken their efforts or  abort their attempts prematurely and  quickly settle for mediocre  solutions, whereas  those who have  a  strong belief in  their capabilities exert greater effort to  master the challenge (Bandura &amp; Cervone, 1983, 1986;  Cervone  &amp;  Peake,  1986; Jacobs, Prentice-Dunn, &amp;  Rogers,  1984; Weinberg,  Gould,  &amp;  Jackson,  1979). Strong perseverance usually pays  off in  performance accomplishments.

There  is  a growing  body of  evidence that human attainments and  positive well-being require an  optimistic sense of personal efficacy (Bandura, 1986). This  is because ordinary social realities are  strewn with  difficulties. They are  full of  impediments, failures, adversities, setbacks, frustrations, and  inequities. People  must  have  a robust sense  of personal efficacy to  sustain the perseverant effort needed  to  succeed. Self-doubts can  set in  quickly after some failures or  reverses. The important matter is  not that difficulties arouse self-doubt, which  is a  natural immediate reaction, but  the speed  of recovery of  perceived self-efficacy from  difficulties. Some people quickly recover their self-assurance; others lose faith in  their capabilities. Because  the  acquisition of  knowledge  and  competencies usually requires  ustained effort in  the  face of difficulties and  setbacks, it is resiliency of  self-belief that counts.

In  his revealing book,  titled Rejection, John  White (1982)  provides vivid  testimony that the  striking characteristic ofpeople who have  achieved eminence  in  their fields is an  inextinguishable sense  of  efficacy and  a  firm belief in  the worth  of what  they are  doing. This  resilient self-belief system enabled them  to  override repeated early rejections of their work.  A robust sense of personal efficacy provides the  needed  staying power.

Self-efficacy beliefs usually affect cognitive functioning through  the  joint influence of  motivational and information-processing operations. This  dual  influence is  illustrated in  studies of  different sources of  variation in  memory performance. The stronger people's beliefs in their memory capacities, the  more effort they  devote to cognitive processing of  memory  tasks, which,  in  turn, enhances their memory performances (Berry, 1987).

Preparation of this article was  facilitated by  Public Health Research Grant No.  MH-5162-25 from the National Institute for Mental Health. This article was  presented as an  invited address at the XXIV International Congress of Psychology, Sydney, Australia, August 1988.

Correspondence concerning this article should be  addressed to Albert Bandura, Building 420, Jordan Hall, Stanford University, Stanford, CA  94305.

Many of  our  literary classics brought their authors repeated rejections. The novelist, Saroyan, accumulated several thousand rejections before he  had  his first literary piece  published. Gertrude  Stein  continued to  submit poems  to  editors for about 20  years before one  was  finally accepted. Now  that is  invincible self-efficacy. Such extraordinary persistence in  the  face of  massive  uninterrupted rejection defies explanation in  terms of  either  einforcement  heory or  utility theory. James  Joyce's book, the Dubliners, was rejected by  22  publishers. Over  a  dozen publishers rejected a  manuscript by  e. e. cummings.  When his mother  finally published it, the dedication, printed in upper  case, read: "With  no  thanks to..."  followed by the  long  list of  publishers who had  rejected his offering.

Early rejection is the rule, rather than the exception, in  other creative endeavors. The Impressionists had to arrange their own art exhibitions because their works  were routinely rejected by  the Paris Salon. Van Gogh sold only one  painting during his  lifetime. Rodin was repeatedly

## Affective Processes

People's beliefs in  their capabilities affect how much stress and  depression they  experience in  threatening or  taxing situations, as  well as  their level of motivation. Such  emotional reactions can  affect action both  directly and  indirectly by altering the  nature and course  of  thinking. Threat is  not  a  fixed property of  situational events, nor does  appraisal of  the  likelihood of  aversive happenings rely solely on reading external signs of  danger or  safety. Rather, threat is  a relational property concerning the match  between  perceived coping capabilities and  potentially aversive aspects of  the  environment.

rejected by  the Ecole  des  Beaux-Arts. The  musical works of  most  renowned  composers were  initially greeted with derision. Stravinsky was run  out  of  Paris by  an  enraged audience and  critics when he  first served them the Rite of Spring. Many other composers  suffered the  same  fate, especially in  the early phases of their career. The  brilliant architect, Frank  Lloyd Wright, was  one  of the more  widely rejected architects during much of  his career.

To  turn to  more  contemporary examples, Hollywood initially rejected the incomparable Fred  Astaire for being only  "a  balding, skinny  actor who can  dance  a little." Decca Records  turned down a recording contract with the  Beatles with  the  nonprophetic evaluation, "We don't like their sound. Groups  of guitars are  on  their way  out." Whoever  issued that rejective pronouncement must  cringe at  each  sight of  a  guitar.

It is not  uncommon  for authors of  scientific classics to  experience repeated initial rejection of their work,  often with  hostile  mbellishments if it is  too  discrepant from the theories in  vogue  at the time. For  example, John  Garcia, who eventually won well-deserved recognition for his fundamental psychological discoveries, was  once  told by a  reviewer of  his oft-rejected manuscripts that one  is  no more likely to  find the  phenomenon he  discovered than bird  droppings in  a cuckoo  clock. Verbal  droppings of this type demand  tenacious elf-belief to  continue the tortuous search for new Muses.  Scientists often reject theories and  technologies that are  ahead  of their time. Because  of the  cold  reception given  to  most  innovations, the  time between discovery and technical realization typically spans  several decades.

It  is  widely  believed that  misjudgment  produces dysfunction. Certainly, gross  miscalculation can  create problems. However,  optimistic self-appraisals of capability that are  not  unduly  disparate from  what  is possible can be  advantageous, whereas veridical judgments can  be  selflimiting. When  people  err in  their self-appraisals, they tend  to  overestimate their capabilities. This  is a  benefit rather than  a cognitive failing to  be  eradicated. If selfefficacy beliefs always  reflected only  what  people  could do routinely, they  would  rarely fail but  they would  not mount the  extra effort needed  to  surpass their ordinary performances.

People  who believe they  can  exercise control over potential threats do not  conjure up apprehensive cognitions and, therefore, are not  perturbed by  them. But  those who believe they  cannot  manage potential threats experience high  levels of stress and  anxiety arousal. They  tend to  dwell  on  their coping  deficiencies and  view  many aspects  of their environment  as fraught with danger. Through  such  inefficacious thought they  distress themselves and  constrain and  impair their level of functioning (Bandura,  1988b, 1988c;  Lazarus  &amp;  Folkman, 1984; Meichenbaum, 1977; Sarason, 1975).

That  perceived coping efficacy operates as  a  cognitive mediator of  anxiety has  been  tested by  creating different levels of  perceived coping efficacy and  relating them  at a microlevel to different manifestations ofanxiety. Perceived coping  inefficacy is  accompanied  by high  levels of  subjective distress, autonomic  arousal, and plasma catecholamine  secretion (Bandura, Reese,  &amp; Adams, 1982; Bandura,  Taylor, Williams, Mefford, &amp; Barchas,  1985). The  combined  results from  the different psychobiological manifestations of  emotional arousal are  consistent in showing  that anxiety and  stress reactions are  low  when people  cope with  tasks in  their perceived self-efficacy range. Self-doubts in  coping efficacy produce  substantial increases in  subjective distress and  physiological rousal. After  perceived coping  efficacy is  strengthened to  the maximal level, coping  with  the  previously intimidating tasks no longer elicits differential psychobiological reactions.

Evidence  suggests that it is  often the  so-called normals  who are  distorters of  reality, but  they  exhibit selfenhancing biases that distort appraisals in  the  positive direction. The  successful, the  innovative, the sociable, the nonanxious, the  nondespondent, and  the social reformers take  an  optimistic view  of  their personal efficacy to  exercise influence over events that affect their lives (Bandura, 1986;  Taylor &amp; Brown, 1988). If not  unrealistically exaggerated, such  self-beliefs foster the  perseverant effort needed  for  personal and social accomplishments. The findings of  laboratory studies are  in  accord with  the  records  of  human triumphs regarding the  centrality of  the motivational effects of  self-beliefs ofefficacy in  human attainments. It takes a  resilient sense of efficacy to  override the  numerous  dissuading impediments to  significant accomplishments.

Anxiety  arousal in  situations involving some risks is affected not  only by  perceived coping efficacy but  also by  perceived self-efficacy to  control intrusive perturbing cognitions. The exercise of  control over  one's own consciousness is summed up  well in the proverb: "You  cannot prevent the birds of worry  and  care from  flying over  your head. But  you  can  stop them  from  building a nest in  your head." Perceived self-efficacy in  thought control is a  key factor in  the  regulation of  cognitively generated arousal. It is  not  the  sheer  frequency of  aversive cognitions but the perceived inefficacy to  turn them  offthat is the major source  of  distress (Kent,  1987;  Salkovskis &amp;  Harrison, 1984). Thus,  the  incidence of  aversive cognitions is  unrelated to anxiety level when  variations in perceived thought control efficacy are  controlled for, whereas  perceived thought control efficacy is strongly related to  anxiety level when the  extent of  aversive cognitions is controlled (Kent  &amp; Gibbons,  1987).

The  role of perceived self-efficacy nd  anxiety arousal in  the causal structure ofavoidant behavior has  also been examined  extensively. The results show that people base their actions on  self-perceptions of  coping efficacy in  situations they  regard as  risky. The stronger the  perceived coping  efficacy, the  more venturesome the  behavior, regardless of  whether  self-perceptions of  efficacy are  enhanced  through  mastery  experiences, modeling  influences,  or  cognitive simulations (Bandura,  1988b). Perceived self-efficacy accounts for a  substantial amount  of variance in  phobic  behavior when anticipated anxiety is partialed out, whereas  the  relationship between  anticipated anxiety and  phobic behavior essentially disappears when perceived self-efficacy is  partialed out  (Williams, Dooseman,  &amp; Kleifield, 1984; Williams, Kinney, &amp; Falbo, in  press; Williams, Turner, &amp; Peer, 1985). In  short, people avoid potentially threatening situations and  activities, not because they are  beset with  anxiety, but  because they believe they will be  unable to  cope  with  situations they regard  as  risky. They  take self-protective action regardless of  whether  they  happen  to  be  anxious at  the  moment. The  dual control of anxiety arousal and  avoidant behavior by  perceived coping efficacy and  thought control efficacy is revealed in  analyses of  the mechanisms  governing personal empowerment over  pervasive social threats (Ozer &amp;  Bandura,  1989). One path  of  influence is  mediated through  the  effects of  perceived coping  self-efficacy on perceived vulnerability and risk  discernment, and the other through the  impact  of  perceived cognitive control self-efficacy on  intrusive aversive thoughts.

trol them impairs cellular components  of  the  immune system  (Coe  &amp; Levine, in  press; Maier,  Laudenslager, &amp; Ryan, 1985). Biological systems are  highly interdependent. The types of  biochemical reactions that have  been shown to  accompany  perceived coping inefficacy are  involved  in the regulation of immune systems. For  example, perceived self-inefficacy in  exercising control over  cognitive stressors activates endogenous opioid  systems (Bandura, Cioffi, Taylor, &amp;  Brouillard, 1988). There  is evidence that some of  the  immunosuppressive effects of inefficacy in  controlling stressors are  mediated by  release of  endogenous  opioids. When  opioid  mechanisms are blocked by  opiate antagonists, the  stress of  coping  inefficacy loses its immunosuppressive power  (Shavit &amp; Martin, 1987).

In the  laboratory research demonstrating immunosuppression through  stress mediation, controllability is studied as  a  fixed dichotomous property in  which  animals  either exercise complete  control over physical stressors, or  they have  no  control whatsoever. In  contrast, most  human stress is activated in  the  course of  learning how to exercise control over  recurring cognitive and  social stressors. It would  not  be  evolutionarily advantageous if acute  stressors invariably impaired  immune  function, because of  their prevalence in  everyday life. Indeed, in  a recently completed  project, my colleagues and I  found (Wiedenfeld et al., 1989)  that stress aroused in  the process of gaining coping efficacy over stressors enhances immune function. The rate of  efficacy acquisition is a  good  predictor of whether exposure to  acute stressors enhances or suppresses immune function.

## Selection Processes

Perceived self-inefficacy to  fulfill desired goals  that affect evaluation of  one's self-worth and  to  secure things that bring satisfaction to  one's life can  give rise to  bouts of  depression (Bandura,  1988a; Cutrona  &amp;  Troutman, 1986; Holahan  &amp; Holahan, 1987a, 1987b;  Kanfer &amp; Zeiss, 1983). When the  perceived self-inefficacy involves social relationships, it can  induce depression both  directly and indirectly by curtailing the  cultivation of  interpersonal relationships that can  provide satisfactions and  buffer the effects of  chronic daily stressors (Holahan  &amp;  Holahan, 1987a). Depressive  rumination not  only  impairs ability to  initiate and  sustain adaptive activities, but  it further diminishes perceptions of  personal efficacy (Kavanagh  &amp; Bower,  1985). Much human depression is also cognitively generated  by dejecting ruminative thoughts  (NolenHoeksema, 1987). Therefore, perceived self-inefficacy to exercise control over  ruminative thought figures prominently in  the occurrence, duration, and  recurrence of depressive episodes (Kavanagh  &amp; Wilson,  1988).

Other  efficacy-activated processes in  the  affective domain  concern the  impact  of  perceived coping efficacy on  basic biological systems that mediate health functioning  (Bandura, in  press-a). Stress has  been  implicated as an  important contributing factor to  many physical dysfunctions. Controllability appears to  be  a  key  organizing principle regarding the  nature of  these stress effects. Exposure to  physical stressors with  a  concomitant ability to control them  has  no  adverse physiological effects, whereas exposure to  the same  stressors without the ability to  con-

People  can  exert some influence over  their life course by their selection of  environments and  construction of  environments. So  far, the discussion has  centered on  efficacyactivated processes that enable people to  create beneficial environments and to  exercise control over  them.  Judgments  of  personal efficacy also  affect selection of  environments. People  tend to  avoid  activities and  situations they  believe exceed  their coping  capabilities, but  they readily undertake challenging activities and  select social environments they judge themselves capable of handling. Any factor that influences choice behavior can  profoundly affect  he  direction of  personal development because the social influences operating in  the  environments that are selected continue to  promote  certain competencies, values,  and  interests long  after the  decisional determinant has  rendered its inaugurating effect. Thus,  seemingly inconsequential determinants can  initiate selective associations that produce  major  and  enduring personal changes (Bandura, 1986; Snyder,  1986).

The  power  of self-efficacy beliefs to  affect the course of life paths through selection processes is clearly revealed in  studies of  career decision-making and career development  (Betz  &amp; Hackett, 1986; Lent  &amp; Hackett, 1987). The more efficacious people judge  themselves to  be,  the wider the range of career options they consider appropriate and  the  better they prepare themselves educationally for

## Exercise  of  Agency Through Goal

## Representations

Another  distinctive human characteristic through which personal agency is exercised is the capacity of forethought. People  do  not  simply react to  immediate environmental influences like weathervanes, nor  are  they  mechanically steered by  implants from  their past. Most  human behavior, being purposive, is regulated by  forethought. The  future time  perspective manifests itself in  many different ways.  People  anticipate the  likely consequences of  their prospective actions, they  set goals  for  themselves, and they plan  courses of action likely to  produce desired outcomes.  Through  the exercise of  forethought and  self-regulative standards, they  motivate themselves and guide their actions anticipatorily. Theories that seek to  explain human behavior solely as  the  product of  external influences  or  the remnants  of  past stimulus inputs present a truncated image  of human nature. This is because people possess self-directive capabilities that enable them  to  exercise some control over  their thoughts, feelings, and  actions by  the  consequences they  produce  for themselves. Psychosocial functioning is, therefore, regulated by an interplay of  self-produced and  external sources of  influence.

different occupational pursuits. Self-limitation of  career development arises more from  perceived self-inefficacy than from  actual inability. By constricting choice behavior that can  cultivate interests and  competencies, self-disbeliefs create their own validation.

It  should be noted  that the  sociocognitive benefits of  a  sense  of  personal efficacy do not  arise simply  from the  incantation of  capability. Saying  something  should not  be  confused with  believing it to  be  so. Simply  saying that one  is capable is not  necessarily self-convincing, especially when it contradicts preexisting firm  beliefs. No amount  of reiteration that I  can  fly will persuade me that I  have  the  efficacy to  get  myself airborne and  to  propel myself through the  air. Action  tendencies vary  with  the strength of self-beliefs of efficacy (Bandura, 1977). Efficacy beliefs exhibit a gradient of strength as  a  function of temporal and  physical proximity to  the relevant activity. One must  consider the height and  slope of the efficacy gradient and  the  threshold strength for acting on  one's self-belief. These  characteristics of  a  self-belief system  are  affected by  the  authenticity ofthe  efficacy information on  which they are  based. Self-efficacy beliefs that are  firmly established are  likely to  remain  strong regardless of  whether one  is far removed  from  the taxing or  threatening activities or  is about  to perform  them.  Such  beliefs are  resilient to adversity. In  contrast, weakly  held  self-beliefs are  highly vulnerable to  change: Self-doubts mount the  nearer one gets to  the taxing activities (Kent, 1987; Kent  &amp; Gibbons, 1987),  and negative experiences readily reinstate selfdisbelief in  one's capabilities.

Efficacy beliefs are the product of a  complex  process of  self-persuasion that relies on cognitive processing of diverse sources of  efficacy information. These include performance mastery experiences, vicarious experiences for judging capabilities in  comparison with performances of  others, verbal persuasion and  allied types of  social influences indicating that one  possesses certain capabilities; and  physiological states from  which  one  may partly judge one's capabilities, strength, and  vulnerability. Information that is  relevant for judging personal capabilities i not inherently enlightening. Rather, in  the  self-appraisal of efficacy these  different sources of  efficacy information must  be  cognitively processed, weighed,  and  integrated through self-reflective thought. Acting  on  one's self-efficacy judgment produces confirming or  disconfirming experiences that prompt further reappraisals of  personal efficacy.

The capability for intentional and  purposive action is  rooted in  symbolic activity. Future  events cannot  be causes  of  current motivation and action because  that would  entail backward  causation in  which  the effect precedes the cause. However,  by  being represented cognitively in  the present, conceived future events are converted into current motivators and  regulators of  behavior. Action  is motivated and directed by cognized  goals  rather than drawn by remote  aims.  Forethought is  translated into incentives and  guides for action through the  aid of  selfregulatory mechanisms.

Development  of  resilient self-efficacy requires  ome experience in  mastering difficulties through perseverant effort. If people  experience only easy successes, they come to  expect quick results and  their sense  of efficacy is easily undermined  by  failure. Some setbacks and  difficulties in human pursuits serve  a  useful purpose  in  teaching that success usually requires  ustained effort. After people become convinced they have  what  it takes to  succeed, they persevere in  the  face of  adversity and quickly rebound from  setbacks. By sticking it out  through tough  times, they  emerge  from  adversity with  a  stronger sense  of efficacy.

Many theories of  self-regulation are  founded  on a negative feedback  control model.  This  type  of  system functions as  a  motivator and  regulator of action through a  discrepancy reduction mechanism.  Perceived discrepancy  between  performance and  an  internal standard triggets action to  reduce the incongruity. In  negative feedback control, if performance matches the internal standard the person  does nothing. A  regulatory process  in  which matching a  standard begets inertness does  not  characterize human self-motivation. Such  a  feedback control system would  produce  circular action that leads nowhere. Nor could  people be  stirred to  action until they  receive feedback of  a  shortcoming. Although  comparative feedback  is essential in  the  ongoing regulation of  motivation, people  can initially raise their level of  motivation by adopting goals before they receive any  feedback regarding their beginning effort (Bandura  &amp; Cervone,  1983). Negative feedback may help  to  keep  them  going on  a  preset course, but  from  time  to  time  they  must  transcend the feedback  loop  to  initiate new challenging courses  for themselves. Different self-regulatory systems operate in the  initiation and  continued regulation of  motivation.

Human  self-motivation relies on discrepancy pro-

erating in  concert account for the major  share of variation in  motivation through goal  systems (Bandura &amp; Cervone, 1986).

In  brief, the agentive properties of a  self-motivational control system  must  include (a)  predictive anticipatory control of  effort, (b)  affective self-evaluative reactions to one's performances rooted  in  a value  system, (c)  selfappraisal of personal efficacy for goal attainment, and  (d) self-reflective metacognitive activity concerning the  adequacy  of  one's efficacy appraisals and  the  suitability of one's standard setting. Evaluation of  perceived self-efficacy  relative to  task demands  indicates whether the  standards being  pursued are  within attainable bounds  or  are unrealistically beyond  one's reach.

## Exercise  of  Agency Through Anticipated Outcomes

duction as  well  as  on discrepancy reduction. It requires both proactive control and reactive or  feedback control. People  initially motivate themselves through  proactive control by  setting themselves valued challenging standards that create a  state of  disequilibrium and  then  mobilizing their effort on  the basis of anticipatory estimation of what it  would take  to  accomplish  them.  Feedback  control comes into play  in  subsequent adjustments of  effort  o achieve desired results. After people  attain the  standard they  have  been  pursuing, those who have  a  strong sense of efficacy generally set a  higher standard for themselves. The  adoption of further challenges creates new motivating discrepancies to be mastered. Similarly, surpassing a standard is more likely to  raise aspiration than  to  lower subsequent performance  to  conform to  the  surpassed standard. Self-motivation thus involves a  hierarchical dual control process of disequilibrating discrepancy production followed  by equilibrating discrepancy reduction. An evaluative executive control system  with a proactive component must  therefore be  superimposed on  a  negative feedback  operation that  keeps changing  aspirational standards with  progressive performance attainments. To capture the  complexity of  human  self-regulation, such an executive control system  must  be invested with  the evaluative agentive properties shown  to  play an  important role in  self-directedness. These  properties are  discussed next.

Goals  operate largely through self-referent processes, rather than  regulating motivation and action directly. These  processes provide the  links between  goals and  action. Cognitive motivation based  on  goal  systems is mediated by  three types of  self-reactive influences: (a) affective self-evaluation, (b) perceived self-efficacy for goal attainment, and (c)  ongoing  readjustment of internal standards. Goals  create motivating involvement in  activities by  specifying the  conditional requirements for positive self-evaluation. People  seek  self-satisfactions from fulfilling valued goals and  are prompted  to  intensify their efforts by  discontent with  substandard performances.

The  ability to  envision the  likely outcomes  of prospective actions is another way  in which  anticipatory mechanisms regulate human motivation and  action. People  strive to gain  anticipated beneficial outcomes and to forestall aversive ones. However,  the effects of  outcome  expectancies on performance motivation are  partly governed  by self-beliefs of  efficacy. There  are  many activities that, if performed well, guarantee valued outcomes, but  they are not  pursued if people  doubt  they can  do  what  it takes to succeed  (Beck &amp;Lund,  1981;  Betz  &amp;  Hackett, 1986; Wheeler,  1983). Self-perceived inefficacy can  thus nullify the motivating potential of alluring outcome  expectations.

The  degree to  which  outcome  expectations contribute  to  performance motivation independently of  self-efficacy beliefs is  partly determined by the  structural relation between  actions and  outcomes  in  a  particular domain of  functioning. In  activities in  which  the  level of competence dictates the outcomes, the types of outcomes people  anticipate depend  largely on their beliefs of  how well  they will be  able to  perform  in  given  situations. In most  social, intellectual, and physical pursuits, those who judge  themselves highly efficacious will expect favorable outcomes, whereas  those who expect poor  performances of  themselves will conjure up negative outcomes. When variations in  perceived self-efficacy are  partialed out, the outcomes  expected for given  performances do not  have much of  an independent effect on behavior (Barling &amp; Abel,  1983; Barling &amp; Beattie, 1983; Godding  &amp; Glasgow, 1985; Lee,  1984a,  1984b; Williams &amp; Watson,  1985). Expected outcomes  contribute to  motivation independently of self-efficacy beliefs when outcomes  are not  completely controlled by  quality of  performance. This  occurs when extraneous factors also affect outcomes, or  outcomes  are socially tied to  a  minimum  level of  performance so  that some variations in  quality of  performance above  and  below  the  standard do not  produce  differential outcomes.

## Hierarchical Dual Control  Mechanisms  in  the Construction and Regulation  of  Action

As already noted, motivation is  self-regulated through the joint influence ofproactive and  feedback mechanisms. The same dual  control operates in  the  construction and

Perceived self-efficacy is another self-referent factor that plays an  influential role in  the  self-regulation of motivation through goal  systems. As previously noted, it is partly on the  basis of  self-beliefs ofefficacy that people choose what  challenges to  undertake, how much effort to expend  in the  endeavor, and  how long to  persevere in  the face of difficulties (Bandura, 1986,  1988a). In  the  face of negative discrepancies between  personal standards and attainments, those who are  assured of  their capabilities heighten their level of  effort and  perseverance, whereas those who are beset by  self-doubts about their capabilities are easily dissuaded by failure. The goals people  set  for themselves at  the  outset of  an endeavor are  subject to change, depending  on the  pattern and  level of  progress they  are  making (Campion &amp;  Lord,  1982). They may maintain their original goal, lower  their sights, or  adopt an  even  more  challenging goal. Thus, the third constituent of  self-influence in  the  ongoing  regulation of  motivation concerns the  readjustment of  internal standards in  light of  one's attainments. These  self-referent influences op-

regulation of  complex patterns of  behavior (Bandura, 1986,  in  press-b). Foresightful conceptions of  actions guide the production of appropriate behavior and  provide the  internal standards for corrective adjustments in  the development  of  behavioral proficiency (Carroll &amp;  Bandura, in  press). These  conceptions are formed  on  the basis of  knowledge  gained through observational learning, inferences from  exploratory experiences, information conveyed  by verbal  instruction, and innovative cognitive syntheses of  preexisting knowledge. The mechanism for transforming cognition into  action operates through  a conception-matching process. This  involves both  transformational and  generative operations. Execution of a  skill must  be  constantly varied to  suit changing circumstances. Adaptive  performance, therefore, requires a generative conception rather than  a one-to-one mapping between representation a d  action. By applying an  abstract specification of  the  activity, people  can  produce  many variations on  the  skill.

control of  action. We  now possess the  capacity to create technologies that can  have  pervasive effects not only  on current life but  also on  that of  future generations. Many technical innovations that provide current benefits also entail hazards and cumulative harmful  effects that can eventually take a  heavy  future toll on  human beings and the  environment.

Conceptions are  rarely transformed into masterful performance on  the first attempt. Monitored enactments serve  as  the  vehicle for  transforming knowledge into skilled action. Performances are  perfected by  corrective adjustments during  behavior production until a close match  is eventually achieved between  conception and  action (Carroll &amp; Bandura, 1985, 1987). Because  errors can produce  costly and  injurious consequences, the  prospects of  healthy survival would  be  bleak  if people  had  to  rely solely on negative feedback  to  develop  competencies. Negative  feedback operates as  a  complementary but  subordinate mechanism  in the process of action construction.

The capacity to  extrapolate future consequences from  known facts enables people to take corrective actions to  avert disastrous futures. It is the  expanded  time  perspective and symbolization of  futures afforded by cognition that  increase the  prospects of  human  survival. Had  humans been ruled  solely by immediate  consequences, they would  have  long ago  destroyed most  of the ecological supports of life. Forethought often saves us  from the  perils of  a foreshortened perspective. However,  the power of  anticipative control must  be  enhanced  by  developing  better methods for  forecasting distal consequences  and stronger social mechanisms for  bringing projected consequences to  bear  on current behavior to keep  us  off self-destructive courses.

## Distinction Between Self as  Agent and as  Object

Social cognitive theory rejects the  dichotomous conception of  self as  agent and  self as  object. Acting on  the  environment and  acting on oneself entail shifting the  perspective of  the  same agent  rather than  reifying different selves regulating each  other or  transforming the self  rom agent  to  object. In  acting as  agents over  their environments, people draw  on  their knowledge  and  cognitive and behavioral skills to  produce  desired results. In  acting as agents over  themselves, people monitor their actions and enlist cognitive guides and  self-incentives to  produce desired personal changes. They  are just as  much agents influencing themselves as  they  are  influencing their environment.

Dual  control is  similarly involved in  the  regulation of  preestablished modes of  action. Forethought guides the selection of actions, and  the results produced by  those actions verify the adequacy of the chosen course. A system of  self-regulation combining proactive guidance with reactive adjustments is best suited for adaptive functioning, especially under  changing circumstances. Psychological theories that rely exclusively on  a  negative feedback model provide only  a  fractional view  of  human self-regulation.

Human  action is, of  course, regulated by  multilevel systems of  control. Cognitive guidance is critical during the  acquisition of  competences  (Carroll &amp; Bandura,  in press). But  after skills have  been  perfected, they no  longer require cognitive control. Their execution is largely regulated by lower  level sensorimotor systems  (Carroll &amp; Bandura,  1987). Partial disengagement of  thought from proficient action frees cognitive resources for other purposes.  If routinized behavior fails to  produce  expected results, the cognitive control system again comes  into play. New courses of action are constructed and  tested. Control reverts to  the  lower  control system  after an adequate means is  found  and  becomes  the  habitual way of  doing things.

## The Power of  Forethought  to  Override Feedback Control

Human  adaptation and  survival depend  increasingly on the power  of forethought to  override immediate feedback

The same  is true for metacognitive activity. In  their everyday transactions, people  act  on their thoughts and later analyze how well  their thoughts have  served them in  managing  events. However,  the  same  person is  doing the  operative thinking and  later evaluating the  adequacy of  his or  her  knowledge, thinking skills, and  action strategies. The shift in  perspective does  not  transform an  individual from  an  agent to  an  object. One is just as  much an  agent reflecting on  one's experiences as  in  generating and  executing the  original courses of  action. The same self performing multiple functions does  not  require creating multiple selves endowed with  different roles.

## Human Agency and Psychoneural  Processes

Human  agency  does  not  imply  psychophysical dualism. Thoughts  are  higher brain processes rather than  psychic entities that exist separately from brain  activities. Ideational and  neural terminology are  simply different ways of  representing the  same cerebral processes. The view that  cognitive events are  neural  occurrences does  not mean  that  psychological  aws regarding psychosocial functioning are  derivable from  neurophysiological ones.

One must  distinguish between  biological laws  governing the mechanics of cerebral systems and  psychological laws of  how cerebral systems can  be  orchestrated to  serve different purposes. Psychological knowledge  of how best to structure influences to  create belief systems and  personal competencies is  not  derivable from knowledge  of  the neurophysical mechanisms  that subserve  such  changes. Thus,  understanding the brain circuits involved in  learning does  not  tell one  much about how best to  present and organize instructional contents, how to  code  them for memory representation, and  how to  motivate learners to attend to, cognitively process, and  rehearse what  they are learning. Nor  does  understanding of how the brain works furnish rules on  how to  create social conditions that cultivate the  skills needed  to  become a successful parent, teacher, or  executive. The optimal conditions must be specified by  psychological principles.

question of  how people occasion self-perceiving and  selfreflecting cognitive activities.

## Human Agency, Freedom, and Determinism

The  notion of human agency also raises the  fundamental issue of its relation to determinism. The  term determinism is used  here to  mean the  production of  effects by  events, rather than  in  the  doctrinal sense  that actions are  completely determined by a prior sequence  of  causes independent  of  the  individual. When  viewed from  the  perspective of  social cognitive theory, there is no  incompatibility between  human agency and  determinism (Bandura, 1986). Freedom  is not  conceived negatively as  the absence of  external coercion or  constraints. Rather, it is  defined positively in  terms  of the exercise of self-influence. I  have already examined  how the  exercise of  personal agency  is achieved through  reflective and regulative thought, the skills at  one's command, and  other tools of self-influence that affect choice and  support selected courses of  action. Self-generated influences operate  deterministically on behavior the  same way as  external sources of  influence do.  Given  the  same environmental conditions, persons who have  developed skills for accomplishing many options and  are  adept at  regulating their own motivation and  behavior are  more successful in  their pursuits than  those who have  limited means  of personal agency. It is because self-influence operates deterministically on action that some  measure  of self-directedness and  freedom is possible.

The influences needed  to  produce  the  neural occurrences underlying complex  human behavior include events external to  the  organism acting together with  selfgenerated ones.  The laws  of  psychology specify how to structure environmental influences and  to  enlist cognitive activities to  achieve given  purposes. Although psychological laws  cannot violate what  is known about  the  physiological system that subserves them,  they need  to be  pursued  in  their own right. Were one  to embark  on  the  road to  reductionism, psychology would  be  reduced to  biology, biology to  chemistry, and  chemistry to  physics, with  the final stop  in  atomic  particles. Neither atomic  particles, chemistry, nor  biology will provide the psychological laws of  human behavior.

The construal of  cognitions as  cerebral processes raises the  intriguing question of  how people come to  be producers of  thoughts that may be novel, inventive, visionary, or  that take complete leave of  reality as  in  flights of fancy. One can  originate fanciful but  coherent thoughts as,  for  example,  visualizing a hippopotamus  gracefully riding the  waves on a  surfboard. Similarly, one  can  get oneself to  cognize several novel acts and  choose to  execute one  of them.  Cognitive production, with  its initiating and creative properties, defies explanation in  terms of external cueing  of  preexisting cognitive products. Neither situational cues, knowledge  structures, conditioned responses, nor  prior brainwaves are  likely to  be  highly predictive of the  specific forms  fanciful thoughts will take. Emergent cognitive events draw  on  existing cognitive structures but go  beyond  them.

If  thought processes are  conceived of  as  cerebral processes, the relevant question is not  how mind  and  body act  on each  other, but  how people can  bring into being cognitive or  cerebral productions. The issues of  interest concern the  brain dynamics  of cognitive generation. The novel  scenario of the surfing hippopotamus was  produced by  the  intentional exercise of  personal agency. Intentionality and  agency  raise the  fundamental question of  how people  activate the  cerebral processes that characterize the  exercise of  agency and  lead to  the  realization f  particular intentions. Inaddition to  asking how people originate thoughts and  actions, one  may  also ask  the intriguing

Those who argue  that people  do not  exercise any control over  their motivation and  action usually invoke a  selective regression of  causes in  the  analysis of  self-regulation. They emphasize  that external events influence judgments  and  actions, but  neglect the  portion of  causation showing  that the environmental events, themselves, are partly shaped by  people's actions. Environments have causes as  do  behaviors. In  the  model  of  reciprocal causation, people  partly determine the  nature of  their environment  and  are  influenced by it. Self-regulatory functions are  personally constructed from  varied experiences not  simply environmentally implanted. Although people's standards and  conceptions have  some  basis in  reality, they are  not just ingrafts of  it. Through  their capacity to  manipulate symbols  and to  engage  in  reflective thought, people  can  generate novel  ideas and innovative actions that transcend their past experiences. They bring influence  to bear  on  their motivation and  action in  efforts to realize valued  futures. They may be  taught the  tools of self-regulation, but  this in  no  way  detracts from  the  fact that by  the exercise of  that capability they help  to  determine  the nature of their situations and  what  they become. The self is thus  partly fashioned through the  continued exercise of  self-influence.

## REFERENCES

Bandura,  A.  (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward  a  unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84,  191-215.

Bandura, A.  (1986). Social foundations of thought and  action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall.

Bandura, A.  (1988a). Self-regulation ofmotivation and  action through

- goal  systems. In  V.  Hamilton, G. H. Bower,  &amp; N. H. Frijda (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on  emotion  and  motivation (pp.  37-61). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer  Academic  Publishers.
- Bandura, A.  (1988b). Perceived self-efficacy: Exercise of control through self-belief. In  J. P.  Dauwalder,  M. Perrez, &amp; V.  Hobi  (Eds,), Annual series of European  research in  behavior therapy (Vol. 2,  pp.  27-59). Lisse, Netherlands: Swets  &amp; Zeitlinger.
- Bandura,  A.  (1988c). Self-efficacy onception of  anxiety. Anxiety Research, 1, 77-98.
- Bandura,  A.  (in press-a). Self-efficacy mechanism in  physiological activation and  health-promoting behavior. In  J. Madden, IV, S.  Matthysse, &amp; J. Barchas  (Eds.), Adaptation, learning and  affect. New York: Raven.
- Bandura,  A. (in press-b). A social cognitive theory of  action. In  J.  P. Forgas  &amp; M. J. Innes (Eds.), Social psychology: Vol. 1.  Proceedings of the XXIV  International Congress of Psychology. Amsterdam:  Elsevier.
- Feltz, D. L.,  &amp;  Landers,  D. M. (1983). Effects of  mental  practice on motor  skill learning and performance: A  meta-analysis. Journal  of Sport Psychology, 5, 25-57.
- Godding,  P.  R.,  &amp;  Glasgow,  R. E.  (1985).  Self-efficacy and outcome expectations as  predictors of  controlled smoking status. Cognitive Therapy  and  Research, 9, 583-590.
- Holahan,  C.  K., &amp; Holahan,  C.  J. (1987a). Self-efficacy, social support, and depression in  aging: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of  Gerontology, 42, 65-68.
- Holahan,  C.  K.,  &amp; Holahan, C.  J. (1987b). Life stress, hassles, and  selfefficacy in  aging: A replication and  extension. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 17, 574-592.
- Jacobs, B.,  Prentice-Dunn, S., &amp; Rogers, R.  W. (1984). Understanding persistence: An interface of  control theory and self-efficacy theory. Basic and  Applied Social Psychology, 5, 333-347.
- Bandura,  A.,  &amp; Adams, N.  E.  (1977). Analysis of  self-efficacy theory of behavioral change. Cognitive Therapy  and  Research, 1, 287-308.
- Bandura,  A.,  &amp;  Cervone,  D. (1983).  Self-evaluative and self-efficacy mechanisms  governing the motivational effects of goal systems. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 45, 1017-1028.
- Kanfer, R.,  &amp; Zeiss, A.  M. (1983). Depression, interpersonal standardsetting, and  judgments of self-efficacy. Journal of Abnormal  Psychology,, 92, 319-329.
- Bandura,  A.,  &amp;  Cervone,  D. (1986).  Differential engagement of  selfreactive influences in  cognitive motivation. Organizational Behavior and  Human  Decision Processes, 38, 92-113.
- Bandura,  A.,  Cioffi, D.,  Taylor, C.  B.,  &amp; Brouillard, M. E.  (1988). Perceived self-efficacy in  coping with  cognitive stressors and opioid activation. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 55, 479-488.
- Bandura,  A.,  Reese, L., &amp; Adams, N.  E.  (1982). Microanalysis of action and fear arousal as  a  function of  differential levels of  perceived selfefficacy. Journal  of Personality and  Social Psychology, 43, 5-21.
- Kavanagh,  D.  J., &amp; Bower,  G,  H.  (1985). Mood and  self-efficacy: Impact of joy  and  sadness  on perceived capabilities. Cognitive Therapy  and Research, 9, 507-525.
- Kavanagh,  D.  J., &amp; Wilson,  P.  H.  (1988). Prediction of outcome  with a group  version of cognitive therapy for depression. Unpublished manuscript, University of  Sydney,  Australia.
- Kazdin,  A. E.  (1978).  Covert  modeling--Therapeutic application of imagined rehearsal. In  J. L.  Singer &amp; K.  S.  Pope  (Eds.), Thepower of human  imagination: New methods  in  psychotherapy. Emotions, personality, and  psychotherapy (pp.  255-278). New York:  Plenum Press.
- Bandura,  A.,  Taylor, C.  B.,  Williams, S.  L.  Mefford,  I. N.,  &amp;  Barchas, J. D.  (1985). Catecholamine secretion as  a  function of perceived coping self-efficacy. Journal of Consulting and  Clinical Psychology, 53, 406414.
- Kazdin, A.  E.  (1979). Imagery  elaboration and  self-efficacy in  the covert modeling  treatment of  unassertive behavior. Journal  of  Consulting and  Clinical Psychology, 47, 725-733.
- Kent,  G. (1987).  Self-efficacious control over  reported physiological, cognitive and  behavioural symptoms of dental anxiety. Behaviour Research and  Therapy, 25, 341-347.
- Bandura,  A.,  &amp; Wood, R.  E.  (1989). Effect of  perceived controllability and performance standards on self-regulation f  complex  decisionmaking. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 56, 805-814.
- Barling, J., &amp;  Abel,  M. (1983). Self-efficacy beliefs and performance. Cognitive Therapy  and  Research, 7, 265-272.
- Barling, J., &amp; Beattie, R.  (1983). Self-efficacy beliefs and sales performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior Management,  5,  41-51.
- Beck,  K.  H., &amp; Lund,  A.  K.  ( 1981). The  effects of health threat seriousness and  personal efficacy upon  intentions and  behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 11, 401-415.
- Berry, J.  M. (1987,  September). A self-e~cacy model  of memory performance. Paper  presented at  the  meeting of  the  American  Psychological Association, New York.
- Betz, N. E.,  &amp; Hackett, G. (1986). Applications of  self-efficacy theory to  understanding career choice behavior. Journal of Social and  Clinical Psychology, 4, 279-289.
- Campion, M. A.,  &amp; Lord,  R.  G. (1982). A control systems  conceptualization of the goal-setting and  changing  process. Organizational Behavior and  Human  Performance, 30, 265-287.
- Carroll, W. R., &amp; Bandura,  A.  (1985). Role  of timing of visual monitoring and motor rehearsal in  observational learning of  action patterns. Journal  of Motor  Behavior, 17, 269-281.
- Carroll, W. R., &amp; Bandura,  A.  (1987). Translating cognition into action: The  role of visual guidance in  observational lt~.arning. Journal of Motor Behavior, 19, 385-398.
- Carroll, W. R.,  &amp; Bandura, A.  (in press). Representational guidance of action production in  observational learning: A causal analysis. Journal of Motor  Behavior.
- Cervone,  D.,  &amp;  Peake,  P.  K. (1986). Anchoring, efficacy, and action: The  influence of judgmental heuristics on  self-efficacy judgments and behavior. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 50, 492-501.
- Coe,  C.  L.,  &amp;  Levine, S.  (in  press). Psychoimmunology: An old  idea whose time  has  come.  In  P.  R.  Barchas  (Ed.), Social physiology of social relations. Oxford, England:  Oxford  University Press.
- Corbin, C.(1972). Mental  practice. In  W. Morgan (Ed.), Ergogenic aids and  muscular performance (pp. 93-118). New York:  Academic  Press.
- Cutrona, C.  E., &amp; Troutman,  B.  R.  (1986). Social support, infant temperament, and  parenting self-efficacy: A mediational model  of  postpartum  depression. Child Development, 57, 1507-1518.
- Kent, G.,  &amp; Gibbons, R.  (1987). Self-efficacy and  the control of anxious cognitions. Journal of Behavior Therapy  &amp; Experimental Psychiatry, 18, 33-40.
- Lazarus, R. S., &amp;  Folkman,  S.  (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York:  Springer.
- Lee, C.  (1984a). Accuracy  of efficacy and  outcome  expectations in  predicting performance in  a  simulated assertiveness task. Cognitive Therapy  and  Research, 8, 37-48.
- Lee, C.  (1984b). Efficacy expectations and  outcome  expectations as  predictors of  performance in  a  snake-handling task. Cognitive Therapy and  Research, 8, 509-516.
- Lent, R.  W.,  &amp; Hackett, G.  (i 987). Career self-efficacy: Empirical status and  future directions. Journal of  Vocational Behavior, 30 347-382.
- Locke,  E,  A.,  Frederick, E., Lee,  C., &amp; Bobko,  P.  (1984). Effect of  selfefficacy, goals, and task  strategies on task  performance. Journal  of Applied Psychology, 69, 241-251.
- Locke,  E.  A., Shaw,  K.  N.,  Saari, L.  M.,  &amp; Latham,  G.  P.  ( 1981). Goal setting and  task performance: 1969-1980. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 125-152.
- Maier,  S.  E,  Laudenslager, M. L., &amp; Ryan, S.  M. (1985). Stressor controllability, immune function, and  endogenous opiates. In  E R.  Brush &amp; J.  B.  Overmier  (Eds.), Affect, conditioning, and  cognition: Essays on  the determinants of behavior (pp.  183-201). Hillsdale, N  J: Erlbaum.
- Markus,  H.,  Cross, S., &amp; Wurf,  E.  (in press). The role of the self-system in  competence. In  J. Kolligian, Jr. &amp; R.  J. Sternberg (Eds.), Competence considered: Perceptions of competence and incompetence across the lifespan. New Haven,  CT: Yale  University Press.
- Meichenbaum, D. H. (1977). Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative approach, New York:  Plenum Press.
- Mento,  A.  J., Steel, R.  P., &amp; Karren, R.  J. (1987). A meta-analytic study of  the  effects of  goal  setting on task  performance: 1966-1984. Organizational Behavior and  Human  Decision Processes, 39, 52-83.
- Nolen-Hoeksema,  S.  (1987). Sex  differences in  unipolar depression: Evidence and  theory. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 259-282.
- Ozer,  E., &amp; Bandura,  A.  (1989). Mechanisms governing empowerment effects: A self-e~icacy analysis. Manuscript submitted for publication. Salkovskis, P.  M.,  &amp; Harrison, J. (1984). Abnormal and  normal  obsessions--A replication. Behaviour Research and  Theral~, 22, 549-552.

- Sarason, I. G.  (1975). Anxiety and  self-preoccupation. In  I. G.  Sarason &amp; D. C.  Spielberger (Eds.), Stress and  anxiety (Vol. 2,  pp.  27-44). Washington, DC: Hemisphere.
- Shavit, Y., &amp; Martin, E C.  0987). Opiates, stress, and  immunity: Animal studies. Annals  of Behavioral Medicine, 9,  l  1-20.
- Snyder, M. (1986). Public appearances, private realities: The  psychology of self-monitoring. New York:  Freeman.
- Taylor, M. S.,  Locke,  E.  A.,  Lee,  C.,  &amp;  Gist, M. E.  0984).  Type A behavior and  faculty research productivity: What are the mechanisms? Organizational Behavior and  Human  Performance, 34, 402-418.
- Taylor, S.  E., &amp; Brown,  J.  D.  (1988). Illusion and  well-being: A social psychological perspective on mental  health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193-210.
- Weinberg  R.  S., Gould,  D.,  &amp;  Jackson, A. (1979). Expectations and performance: An  empirical test of  Bandura's self-efficacy theory. Journal  of Sport Psychology, 1,  320-331.
- Wheeler,  K. G. (1983). Comparisons  of  self-efficacy and expectancy models  of  occupational preferences for  college males  and  females. Journal  of Occupational Psychologg, 56, 73-78.
- White, J. (1982). Rejection. Reading,  MA:  Addison-Wesley.
- Wiedenfeld, S.  A.,  O'Leary, A.,  Bandura, A.,  Brown,  S., Levine, S., &amp; Raska,  K. (1989). Impact of perceived self-efficacy m  coping with stressors on  immune  function. Manuscript submitted for publication.
- Williams, S.  L.,  Dooseman, G.,  &amp;  Kleifield, E.  (1984). Comparative power  of guided mastery and  exposure treatments for intractable phobias. Journal of Consulting and  Clinical Psychology, 52, 505-518.
- Williams, S.  L., Kinney, E J., &amp; Falbo, J.  (in press). Generalization f therapeutic changes in  agoraphobia: The  role of  perceived self-efficacy. Journal of Consulting and  Clinical Psychology,
- Williams, S.  L., Turner, S.  M.,  &amp; Peer, D. E (1985). Guided  mastery and performance desensitization treatments for  severe acrophobia. Journal  of Consulting and  Clinical Psychology, 53, 237-247.
- Williams, S.  L., &amp; Watson,  N.  (1985). Perceived danger  and  perceived self-efficacy as  cognitive mediators of  acrophobic behavior. Behavior Therapy, 16,  136-146.
- Wood, R.  E.,  &amp; Bandura, A.  (1989). Impact  of  conceptions of  ability on  self-regulatory mechanisms  and  complex  decision-making. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology, 56, 407-415.
- Wood, R. E.,  &amp; Bandura, A. (in press). Social cognitive theory of  organizational management. Academy of Management Review.