<!-- image -->

## Motivation, Emotion, Cognition, and Communication: Definitions and Notes Toward a Grand Theory

## Ross Buck 1

University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, United States 1 Corresponding author: e-mail address: ross.buck @ uconn.edu

## Contents

| 1. Defining Motivation, Emotion, and Cognition                          | 1. Defining Motivation, Emotion, and Cognition                          | 29   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
| 1.1                                                                     | Traditional Definitions                                                 | 30   |
| 1.2                                                                     | Primary Motivational - Emotional Systems (Primes)                       | 30   |
| 1.3                                                                     | The Developmental - Interactionist Model of Motivation and Emotion      | 31   |
| 1.4                                                                     | The ARI Model and ARI Solid                                             | 32   |
| 1.5                                                                     | The Developmental - Interactionist Model of Cognition                   | 33   |
| 1.6                                                                     | Low and High Roads to Cognition                                         | 34   |
| 2. A Construct Validity Approach to Motivation and Emotion?             | 2. A Construct Validity Approach to Motivation and Emotion?             | 36   |
| 2.1                                                                     | The Hundred-Year Emotion War                                            | 36   |
| 2.2                                                                     | The Biological Essence: Neurochemical Systems                           | 37   |
| 2.3                                                                     | The Ecological Essence: Display and Communication                       | 38   |
| 2.4                                                                     | Social Learning and Emotion                                             | 39   |
| 2.5                                                                     | Conclusions                                                             | 41   |
| 3. Measuring Emotion and Emotion Communication                          | 3. Measuring Emotion and Emotion Communication                          | 42   |
| 3.1 Initial Studies                                                     | 3.1 Initial Studies                                                     | 43   |
| 3.2                                                                     | Studies in Brain-Damaged Patients                                       | 44   |
| 3.3                                                                     | Communication: Symbolic, Spontaneous, and Pseudo-spontaneous            | 46   |
| 3.4                                                                     | Other Studies                                                           | 47   |
| 3.5                                                                     | Conclusions                                                             | 48   |
| 4. Health Implications of Communicating Motivational - Emotional States | 4. Health Implications of Communicating Motivational - Emotional States | 48   |
| 4.1 The Stress - Disease Relationship                                   | 4.1 The Stress - Disease Relationship                                   | 48   |
| 4.2                                                                     | The Expressive Writing Paradigm                                         | 49   |
| 5.                                                                      | Motivational - Emotional States in Decision-Making and Risk             | 50   |
|                                                                         | Unreasoned Actions and Unplanned Behaviors                              | 50   |
| 5.1 5.2                                                                 |                                                                         | 52   |
| 5.3                                                                     | TEEMs, Warning, and Emotional Inoculation                               | 53   |
|                                                                         | The Safer-Sex Communication (SAFECOMM) Scale                            |      |
| 5.4                                                                     | The User Affective Experience (UAX) Scale                               | 54   |
| 5.5                                                                     | Predictions                                                             | 54   |

| 6.                                                         |   Media Communication and Emotional Education 55 |
|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| 6.1 Emotions in Relationships: Silly Love Songs            |                                               55 |
| 6.2 Measuring Emotional Appeals in Songs: The EGrats Scale |                                               56 |
| 6.3 The Appeal of ' Negative ' Media Depictions            |                                               58 |
| 7. The Communicative Gene Hypothesis: Empathy and Altruism |                                               59 |
| 7.1 Classical Ethology and Communication                   |                                               59 |
| 7.2 The Selfish Gene Critique                              |                                               59 |
| 7.3 Defining the Replicator                                |                                               60 |
| 7.4 Communicative Relationships as Replicators             |                                               61 |
| 8. Conclusions                                             |                                               62 |
| References                                                 |                                               62 |
| Further Reading                                            |                                               69 |

## Abstract

I present specific definitions of motivation, emotion, and cognition in terms of primary motivational -emotional systems or primes ; and develop a Developmental -Interactionist view of their interrelationships. I address the ' hundred-year emotion war ' about whether the concept ' emotion ' can be considered a unitary construct, arguing that a simple definition is inappropriate. First, neurochemical systems form the bases of subjectively experienced emotions (affects), while, at a different level of analysis, ecological selection pressures shape emotional displays. Second, different aspects of emotional responding (physiological arousal, display, and subjective affect) are differently accessible during development, and they therefore undergo different patterns of social learning ( emotional education ) with implications for emotional (in) competence. I then discuss the conceptualization and measurement of emotional communication, including evidence that unlike symbolic communication (e.g., language), spontaneous emotional communication is based on right-hemisphere mechanisms. I then address implications of the Developmental -Interactionist view for health implications of communicating emotion; the role of emotion in risky decision-making and the potential of Targeted Emotional Education Modules (TEEMs) for fostering emotional inoculation ; the role of media communication in emotional education; and the communicative gene hypothesis as an alternative to the selfish gene theory in understanding empathy and altruism.

Authors of articles in Advances in Motivation Science are encouraged to tell an 'intellectual story' about their program of research and theory: its evolution, implications for the field, and future trajectory. I have developed a view of motivation and its relationships with emotion and cognition over five decades and value the opportunity now to consider the adequacy of this view at a time of skepticism for grand theories, where some suggest that broad integrative definitions are not useful. However, this is also a time of a revolution in how we can measure motivation and emotion. There

are continuing advances in observing, recording, and manipulating genetic and neurochemical bases of motivational and emotional phenomena; and in observing and recording the subtle nuances of nonverbal display, expression, and communication that bring motivational and emotional phenomena out of the individual and into the social milieu. Indeed, one could argue that broad integrative treatments of motivation and emotion are exactly what we need to make sense out of the burgeoning plethora of new empirical data.

My personal sojourn into motivation theory and its relationship with emotion and cognition began in my first position in Psychology at Carnegie-Mellon University in the late 1960s. I contracted with John Wiley and Sons publishers to write a general treatment of motivation . The result, entitled Human Motivation and Emotion (1976) was successful and appeared in 1988 in an expanded second edition plus a Japanese translation by Makoto Nakamura and Toshiteru Hatayama. An important aspect of this work was to define motivation and emotion, and their relationship, in a general way that is meaningful at many levels of analysis. Guided by traditional conceptions, such as those summarized by Kleinginna and Kleinginna in their excellent papers (1981a, 1981b), I attempted this in both editions, as well as in a 1985 Psychological Review paper, 'Prime theory: An integrated view of motivation and emotion.'

<!-- image -->

## 1. DEFINING MOTIVATION, EMOTION, AND COGNITION

Historically, the concepts of motivation and emotion were distinct. In America in the early 20th century, drive-reduction theories defined motivation in terms of biological deficits that investigators could easily define and manipulate, such as by hours of food deprivation; while investigators largely ignored emotion because of the seeming impossibility of observing and measuring subjectively experienced feelings and desires. The line between the two concepts began to blur when investigators realized that external stimuli and cognitive processes could motivate behavior, such as incentive motivation and adaptive behavior that anticipates biological deficits (Bindra, 1968; Bolles, 1967). Also, Skinner's (1953) prediction that advances in technology might someday make 'private events' observable began to be realized. It is now widely recognized that feelings and desires can involve potentially observable brain activity, with an explosion of research in what my late and lamented friend Panksepp (1998) termed affective neuroscience . Cannon, Lewis, and Britton (1927) had anticipated the general pattern of response in his classic argument that subcortical systems simultaneously

activate peripheral bodily systems resulting in physiological arousal and cortical systems resulting in subjective experience. Also, at the same time, Darwin's (1998/1872) observations in the Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals were applied to humans in Tomkins (1962-1963) theory of primary affects, in Ekman and Friesen's (1975) neurocultural theory, and in Izard's (1971, 1977) evolutionary-developmental theory of emotion. The latter investigators emphasized the display of emotion in facial expressions, while others studied emotional expression in touch (Clynes, 1977) and bodily/spatial behaviors (Argyle, 1975; Hall, 1966).

## 1.1 Traditional Definitions

The traditional definition of motivation is as a process by which behavior is activated and directed toward a goal , and emotion, while also associated with goal-directed behavior, involves peripheral physiological arousal , expressive display , and subjective experience or affect (Kleinginna &amp; Kleinginna, 1981a, 1981b; Young, 1961). Some argue that the constructs are related but distinguishable, with motivation involving approaching rewards and avoiding punishments, and emotions involving affective subjective experience (Chiew &amp; Braver, 2011; Crocker et al., 2013). Some see emotions as emergent from one's status involving rewards and punishments (Carver, 2006). Despite the conceptual similarity, investigators usually conduct research on motivation independently of studies of emotion, and Chiew and Braver commented that it would be desirable to 'unite disparate lines of research within a common theoretical framework' (2011, p. 8).

## 1.2 Primary Motivational -Emotional Systems (Primes)

In my own definition, I see motivation and emotion as different aspects of the same phenomenon: a motivational -emotional system . I define motivation as a potential for the activation and direction of behavior that is inherent in a system of behavior control (Buck, 1985, p. 394). This conception is analogous to the notion of energy in physics: matter may have potential energy due to its position (e.g., a weight raised to a height) or physical arrangement (e.g., a coiled spring). Importantly, the potential is not observed until released by an appropriate stimulus. Then it is manifest in matter: in heat, light, and/or force. Analogously, I suggest that motivation is not observed until released, and then it is manifest in emotion: in physiological response, expressive display, and subjective affect. Thus, I define emotion as the manifestation

or readout of motivational potential in physiological responses ( Emotion I ), display ( Emotion II ), and experienced affect ( Emotion III ).

I label biologically based emotions as primary motivational -emotional systems or primes (Buck, 1985, 1999). These exist at multiple levels: for example, in a simple spinal reflex such as the knee-jerk reflex, the motivational potential exists in the arrangement of sensory and motor neurons between the knee and spinal cord. The neurologist's tap on the knee releases the potential. At a higher level are instincts or fixed-action patterns that may involve complex behaviors, such as migratory behaviors, the potential for which is released by factors such as temperature and the day -night cycle. At progressively higher levels are primary drives based on biological needs, acquired or learned drives, primary affects, and effectance motives activated by novelty. Primes are special-purpose processing systems : they are biologically based and evolved to serve relatively specific functions. As one goes up the hierarchy from reflexes, to instincts, to drives, to affects, to effectance motivation, these systems increasingly interact with general-purpose processing systems of learning, reasoning, and cognitive processing (see Fig. 1).

## 1.3 The Developmental -Interactionist Model of Motivation and Emotion

Fig. 1 illustrates a Developmental -Interactionist model , where special-purpose and general-purpose systems interact over the process of development. The x -axis of Fig. 1 shows the relative influence of special-purpose and general-purpose systems across a dimension that may be defined in several ways. For example, it can represent different situations involving emotion

Fig. 1 The Developmental -Interactionist model of motivation, emotion, and cognition.

<!-- image -->

as the special-purpose system and reason as the general-purpose system. Emotion is always present, and in Fig. 1, we assume its level constant across situations. Reason may vary from not being present at all (pure raw emotion, left extreme of figure) to having much more influence than emotion (e.g., listening to a lecture or contemplating an equation). However, even when dominated by reason, emotion is always present (right side of figure).

A second way of defining the x -axis of Fig. 1 is as the developmental process, with the infant on the left and the adult on the right. Emotion dominates the infant, but as development advances the infant progressively learns more about the world, learns language, mathematics, and concrete and formal logical reasoning. The relative influence of emotion declines but never disappears. A third way of defining the x -axis is as the evolutionary scale, with simple creatures at the left (ants, bees, even microbes), and progressively more complex creatures evolving with progressively more complex abilities of learning and cognitive processing. A fourth way of defining the x -axis is as an involvement dimension, with pure emotional involvement at the left and rational involvement playing a progressively greater role as one goes to the right.

## 1.4 The ARI Model and ARI Solid

When defining an involvement dimension, Fig. 1 is termed the Affect -Reason -Involvement ( ARI ) model and the x -axis is termed the Affect/Reason continuum ( A/R continuum ) to model emotional and rational processes in persuasion (Buck, Anderson, Chaudhuri, &amp; Ray, 2004). We can add a third dimension to the ARI model to illustrate the relationships between affect, reason and involvement. The ARI solid is a three-dimensional figure bounded on one side by a low-high Level of Involvement ( LI ) dimension and on the other by the A/R continuum (Fig. 2). An ARI slice , in which the relative influence of affect and reason remains constant as involvement varies, represents the relative influence of affect and reason at a given point on the A/R continuum. The 'floor' of the ARI solid is a two-dimensional space with an involvement dimension on the y -axis and the A/R continuum on the x -axis. LI and the A/R ratio can represent the position of an object on this floor: for example, a consumer product like an automobile, candy bar, or insurance policy. The floor of the ARI solid is similar to the Foot, Cone, and Belding grid (FCB grid) used in advertising research, which contrasts high and low involvement with 'think' and 'feel' categories (Vaughn, 1980, 1986).

Fig. 2 The ARI solid model of hot, cold, and indifferent cognitive processing.

<!-- image -->

## 1.5 The Developmental -Interactionist Model of Cognition

The Developmental -Interactionist model presented in Fig. 1 can also be adapted to model cognition and cognitive processing. In this case, special-purpose processing systems represent what epistemologists refer to as knowledge by acquaintance (Buck, 1990). Knowledge by acquaintance was described by Bertrand Russell as the self-evident 'presentational immediacy of experience' (1912, p. 73). James J. Gibson termed such raw perception awareness : 'To perceive is to be aware of the surfaces of the environment and of oneself in it' (1979, p. 255). Knowledge by acquaintance involves perceptual systems evolved to detect information in the form of stimulus energy physically present in the environment: in light, vibration, and volatile chemical substances (Gibson, 1966, 1979). Gibson argued that species evolved to be sensitive to those aspects of the environment that afford possibilities or opportunities for behavior: affordances . There are three sorts of 'raw' awareness. First, there is awareness of affordances in the terrestrial environment, such as 'sitability' and 'walkability.' Second, there is awareness of affordances provided by other animals: 'other animals afford, above all, a rich and complex set of interactions, sexual, predatory, nurturing, fighting, playing, co-operating, and communicating' (Gibson, 1979, p. 128). He noted that other animals 'can only give off information about themselves insofar as they are tangible, audible, odorous, tasteable, or visual' (Gibson, 1979, p. 135). Emotion II displays functioning as social affordances

provide much of this information (McArthur &amp; Baron, 1983). Third, Gibson recognized awareness of sensations of internal origin-feelings and emotions-the 'pangs and pressures of the internal environment' (1966, p. 31). I conceptualize these as bodily affordances and view knowledge by acquaintance of the Emotion III readout as awareness of bodily affordances.

In contrast, knowledge by description is knowledge ABOUT events constructed from restructuring or processing perceptual data into an internal representation of reality, based upon information processing, memory, inference, and other sorts of analytic cognitive processes. Epistemology has long distinguished between knowledge by acquaintance and description: for example, by St. Augustine in De Magistro (Marsh, 1956). Languages reflect the distinction, as in the French connaitre versus savoir and the German kennen versus weissen ( James, 1890). Developmental -Interactionist theory suggests that knowledge by acquaintance and description are based on special-purpose and general-purpose systems, respectively, that interact over the course of development as is illustrated in Fig. 1.

## 1.6 Low and High Roads to Cognition

Knowledge by acquaintance and description function within a larger system of appraisal , the process by which the personal relevance of an event is apprehended (Parkinson, 1997). LeDoux and colleagues demonstrated that direct sensory input to the amygdala is necessary for learning conditioned fear responses (LeDoux, Sakaguchi, &amp; Reis, 1984). In the auditory system, the 'classic' auditory pathway proceeds from the cochlea of the ear to the brainstem, the medial geniculate body (MGB), and the part of the neocortex specialized for auditory sensation. These investigators identified a parallel auditory pathway that proceeds from the MGB to the amygdala. Thus, the amygdala has its own subcortical sensory inputs that constitute fast evolutionarily primitive 'early warning systems' that quickly trigger emotional responses to threatening stimuli. LeDoux (1996) termed this the low road to cognition. Microseconds later, more completely processed input enters the amygdala from centers associated with higherorder cognition, so that we are able to know by description what caused the emotional reaction and initiate appropriate coping behavior. This is the high road to cognition.

In effect, subcortical systems filter experience based upon innate releasers and conditioned emotional responses to environmental events. Subcortical systems first pick up stimuli and, if challenging, engage the low road to

Fig. 3 Developmental -Interactionist model of the appraisal process. Adapted from Figure 1.6 in Buck, R. (1988). Human motivation and emotion. 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley.

<!-- image -->

cognition: they are attended to and known by acquaintance. Fig. 3 illustrates this process. It begins with a challenging stimulus (e.g., a stimulus with motivational/emotional implications) that is either internal or external to the organism. These impinge on what amounts to a pre-attentive 'filter' representing the unique characteristics and learning experiences of that individual (dotted lines). This filter includes two elements. The first involves the primes, representing the unique pattern of neurochemical systems inherited by the individual ( encoded genome ) plus any changes in arousal/ arousability in the functioning of those systems due to experience vis-avis those stimuli during development ( effective genome ). These systems also include mirror neurons 'picking up' directly the feelings and intentions of others. The second element in the filter involves the unique learning experiences of the individual relevant to those stimuli, including classically conditioned associations as well as direct or vicarious learning experiences.

The filter determines the impact of those specific stimuli for that specific individual in that specific situation. Thus, the impact of emotional stimuli reflects (1) the state of arousal/arousability of the neurochemical systems comprising the primes in question and (2) the individual's relevant conditioning and learning associated with those stimuli over the course of development. The stimuli impinge upon neurochemical systems underlying motivation and emotion directly and without the mediation of analytic cognition: the LeDoux (1996) low road to cognition. Therefore, we respond

emotionally before we appraise the stimulus (Tamietto et al., 2009; Zajonc, 1980, 1984).

Stimuli activate adaptive and homeostatic responses (Emotion I); spontaneous displays (Emotion II) and subjective experiences or affects (Emotion III). The 'raw' awareness of the stimuli thus has two aspects: the knowledge by acquaintance of the stimuli themselves and the knowledge by acquaintance of the emotional response to the stimuli (Emotion III). This is the first stage of Arnold's (1960) estimative system and constitutes the primary appraisal of the stimuli based on experience, present context, and subjective emotional responses. Primary appraisal gives the individual the basis for labeling the stimuli. Higher-level information processing systems organize secondary appraisal -the knowledge by description of the stimuli and their subjective emotional impact-resulting in a consciously label-able motivational/emotional response. The individual then has a basis for coping with the stimuli. Coping includes the initiation of appropriate goal-directed behaviors (Lazarus, 1966), and can feed back to become a stimulus in its own right. For example, the stimulus to a sudden fright may quickly be recognized as innocuous or highly dangerous. The person's overt coping response may act to alter the original emotional stimulus, a process not illustrated in Fig. 3. If an angry person attacks, the enemy may flee or stand her ground, and the consequences may alter the functioning of the filter and appraisal process on subsequent occasions.

<!-- image -->

## 2. A CONSTRUCT VALIDITY APPROACH TO MOTIVATION AND EMOTION?

## 2.1 The Hundred-Year Emotion War

There is controversy in the current literature over whether emotion is a natural kind, that has been characterized as a 'hundred-year emotion war' (Lindquist, Siegel, Quigley, &amp; Barrett, 2013). Natural kinds are unitary essences that we discover in nature rather than construct by the human mind. In this regard, Lindquist et al. pointed out what has long been a bugaboo in emotion research: different measures of emotion often do not vary together. They invoke the MacCorquodale and Meehl (1948) concept of a hypothetical latent construct, whose existence we infer based upon observed relationships between measures of the construct. Cronbach and Meehl (1955) formalized the construct validity approach to operationalize latent constructs: different measures of a construct should correlate with each other because they have a common cause, in this case, the emotion. Convergent

validity would be demonstrated when different measures correlate highly in time and intensity across instances, and discriminant validity would be demonstrated if certain measures did not correlate across different emotions (e.g., fear versus anger).

The concept of 'emotion' is not a unitary latent construct if we apply the criteria of construct validity rigidly and inflexibly. This has had serious consequences for the field. Some have questioned the validity of emotion as a scientific concept (Dixon, 2012), and an Annual Review of Psychology summary of the emotion field questioned whether scientists can or should study emotion, concluding that an integrative theory of emotion is impossible because its definition is meaningful only in the context of a given research program (Niedenthal &amp; Brauer, 2012). While a construct validity approach may be internally consistent and coherent, the nomological net established by such an approach may be limited in scope, particularly in a rapidly developing area of investigation. Such approaches may erect conceptual stovepipes that do not relate to other approaches and may be insensitive to new information.

There are two answers to the construct validity critique of the concept of emotion. One is that emotions do exist as essences or natural kinds, but on multiple levels of analysis. I suggest that we can understand all emotions in terms of two complementary but distinct 'essences': at one level there are neurochemical systems and at another level, ecological demands and functions (Buck, 2014). The second answer is that different aspects of emotion-Emotion I arousal, Emotion II display, and Emotion III subjective affect-are differently accessible during social learning due to their different accessibility to the responder and the socialization agent, and therefore undergo different patterns of socioemotional socialization. I consider these in turn.

## 2.2 The Biological Essence: Neurochemical Systems

At the biological level, neurochemical systems embody motivational potential contributing to subjective emotional experiences that we can think of as analogous to musical instruments contributing to a symphony. Neurotransmitters and agonists or antagonists that, respectively, facilitate or impede neurotransmission define neurochemical systems as distinct and dissociable but interrelated modules, and are in Pert's (1997) terms, 'molecules of mood.' Peptide neurotransmitters that are most closely associated with subjective affect are direct genetic products, constructed by DNA in the nuclei

of their parent neurons, so subjective affects are analogous to voices of the genes . Acting together, they can produce the equivalent to a symphony of the genes that plays every waking moment and even invades our dreams (Buck &amp; Ginsburg, 1997a). Usually whispering and murmuring in pianissimo, sometimes speaking out forcefully, and occasionally screaming and shouting in crescendo, feelings and desires carry the influence of the genes to the behaving organism. They do not control human behavior, rather they coax and cajole, softly or stridently.

We can identify many specific affects with specific neurochemical systems, including at least euphoria, anxiety, pain, stress, nurturance, excitement, power, trust, and panic (Buck, 2014). These feelings and desires are associated with prominent psychoactive drugs of use and abuse. Examples include euphoriants such as endorphins or opiates, antidepressants such as Zoloft and Prozac, anti-anxiety drugs such as Librium and Valium, tranquilizers such as the barbiturates, energy drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, stimulants such as caffeine and nicotine, and drugs promoting social bonding such as oxytocin and vasopressin. The functioning of these neurochemical systems is increasingly open to observation by advanced biological and physiological techniques, including investigating specific genetic systems by genetic knock-out and knock-in techniques, double-blind studies of neurochemicals during social interaction, and on-line observation and manipulation of brain systems by advanced electrophysiological and scanning technology.

## 2.3 The Ecological Essence: Display and Communication

Neurochemical systems evolved in the context of ecological requirements: that is, necessities born from functioning and surviving in the terrestrial and social environment. At the ecological level, motivational potential is inherent in publicly observable displays, including spatiotemporal cues, touches, pheromone releases, facial expressions, body postures, and vocalizations. These can motivate approach, avoidance, escape, aggregation, separation, exploration, investigation, competition, cooperation, sex, play, and nurturance. These functions take the phenomenon of emotion outside the individual organism and brain into the communicative social environment. Emotions are displayed as well as felt, and these displays are 'picked up' by partners in communicative exchanges that are critical to social organization.

The essential reality of emotion with respect to display and communication is just as 'real' as are the neurochemical systems, and just as open to objective observation and investigation. Moreover, as noted, on both levels

there has been a revolution in our ability to measure emotional phenomena. At the ecological level, this involves using inexpensive low-light video technology and high-speed automatic computer analysis to image, measure, and time fleeting nuances of display and expression occurring during social interaction. This revolution in observation has rendered the ephemeral permanent, allowing us objectively to record and examine as never before the 'body language' of nonverbal communication in human beings and other animals (Buck &amp; Miller, 2016; Miller, Denes, Diaz, &amp; Buck, 2014).

The distinction between biology and ecology as two bases for the essence of emotion as a natural kind answers a major objection that has been raised by adherents of the construct validity approach: there do not seem to be dissociable brain systems easily associated with the classic Tomkins -Ekman -Izard primary affects of happiness, sadness, fear, anger, etc. (Lindquist, Wager, Kober, Bliss-Moreau, &amp; Feldman-Barrett, 2012). At the biological level, a variety of neurochemical systems may contribute to the subjectively experienced symphony of feeling. For example, diazepam binding inhibitor (DBI: anxiety), cholecystokinin (CCK: panic), and corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH: stress) may contribute to subjective feelings associated with the primary affect of fear. These multiple neurochemical systems are potentially relevant to communicating escape and avoidance at the ecological level, which are signaled by the unitary universal facial expression of fear (Buck, 2010). This distinction also addresses a significant limitation of the Tomkins -Ekman -Izard view, which defines primary affects in terms of facial expression only, leaving out prosocial emotions such as Panksepp's (1998) CARE, PLAY, LUST, and PANIC. Most of the latter display at intimate social distances (defined as &lt; 18 00 in human beings). Hall (1966) pointed out that facial expressions are most useful to communication at personal and social distances, and that patterns involving touch, odor, pressure changes, and the sense of radiant heat-what Clynes (1977) termed sentic patterns -function best as displays at intimate distances. Clynes' and subsequent research has suggested that, like emotional facial expressions, sentic patterns are innate, universal, and pancultural (Hertenstein, Keltner, App, Bulleit, &amp; Jaskolka, 2006; Miller, 2012).

## 2.4 Social Learning and Emotion

This communicative aspect of emotion is involved in the second answer to the construct validity critique of the emotion concept. The three aspects of emotion are differently accessible in the social learning process, and therefore must undergo different patterns of learning during socioemotional

development (Buck, 1984). Emotion III subjective affect is accessible only to the responder (for example, a child): the socialization agent (for example, a parent) does not have direct access to the child's feelings or desires. Instead, the parent has access to the child's Emotion II displays, which are not accessible to the child: thus, we cannot see our own facial expressions or body postures, and we hear our own tone of voice through bone conduction. In addition, except for occasional blushes and feelings of heart palpitations, neither parent nor child has good access to Emotion I physiological arousal. As a result, social learning about emotions is unique. The child learns about Emotion III feelings and desires by feedback from others based upon their responses to the child's Emotion II displays: this is social biofeedback (see Fig. 4).

For example, a boy Jack might be building with blocks, and when they fall Jack screams and throws a block. His parent nearby says, 'Jack, you are frustrated and angry, but don't throw blocks! Go to your room and relax, and come back when you feel better.' This gives Jack information about what he is feeling, what caused the feelings, and what to do and what not to do when those feelings occur: the feeling is called anger in English, it is caused by frustration, and while throwing things is not acceptable when that feeling occurs, relaxing is acceptable and encouraged. This constitutes

Fig. 4 Role of accessibility of emotional responses in emotional experience, emotional display, emotional communication, emotional education, and emotional competence.

<!-- image -->

accurate emotional education -labeling the feeling/desire and its causes-and it fosters emotional competence -knowing what to do when that feeling/desire occurs. In contrast, a girl Jill who does the same thing as Jack might receive a slap and told, 'Young ladies do not act like that!' This leaves Jill without a vocabulary for the feelings she experienced, their causes, or direction about what to do when that feeling occurs. This inhibits and suppresses her tendency to express similar feelings, so she will be less likely to display such feelings in the future. At the same time, the stress of the punishment and resulting situation of helplessness may increase autonomic arousal. The result may be an internalizing pattern of emotional response, with high physiological responding, low expressivity, and tendencies toward hypoexpressive alexithymia ('no words for mood': Nemiah &amp; Sifneos, 1970).

One can readily appreciate that, in the case of other emotions, Jack and Jill may get differing sorts of messages: Jack might be punished for expressions of fear and sadness, for example, while these displays may be allowed and even encouraged in Jill. The resulting emotional education may vary widely from person to person and from one cultural context to another. This can result in greater or lesser abilities to label feelings and desires accurately, to understand their causes, and to know what to do and not to do when they occur. Accuracy in both emotional education and emotional competence requires accuracy in emotional communication between child and parent: the child must accurately display emotions, and the parent must perceive and correctly interpret these and give accurate social biofeedback that provides the child with correct information.

## 2.5 Conclusions

For the reasons outlined in this section, a naı ¨ve construct validity approach to the construct of emotion, and by extension, motivation, is oversimplified and inappropriate. Motivation and emotion are complex and multifaceted constructs that are approachable on multiple levels of analysis from genetics to social anthropology; but it is not correct to conclude that either construct is unmeasurable, scientifically invalid, or impervious to integrative theory. In fact, as I suggested, they are measurable in many ways and at many levels, so that integrative theory is required to disentangle, comprehend, and understand them. Ultimately, Lindquist et al. (2013) concluded that the most important issue in the hundred-year's emotion war is whether models agree with empirical data. In that spirit, I next examine whether the integrated view of motivation and emotion proffered here is supported by current data.

<!-- image -->

## 3. MEASURING EMOTION AND EMOTION COMMUNICATION

Myinterest in communication began working as a Research Associate with Robert E. Miller at the University of Pittsburgh Medical School while finishing my Ph.D. degree. Miller studied the communication of affect in rhesus monkeys with a Cooperative Conditioning paradigm that involved teaching two monkeys to press a bar when a light came on to avoid a shock. Heseparated them so that one, the sender , could see the light but did not have access to the bar. The second, receiver , monkey had the bar but could not see the light. The receiver was, however, provided with the video image of the sender's face, and Miller reasoned that if the sender showed a fearful facial expression when the light came on, and if the receiver could perceive and correctly interpret its meaning, the receiver could press the bar at the critical time and avoid the shock for both. Miller and his colleagues demonstrated that normal rhesus monkeys could solve this task relatively easily (Miller, Banks, &amp; Ogawa, 1962). However, monkeys that had been isolated for the first year of life at Harry Harlow's laboratory at the University of Wisconsin could neither send nor receive in the task, although they performed normally when responding alone to the light. When a normal monkey was the sender, the isolate receiver failed to respond when the sender saw the light, perhaps because the receiver failed to look at the sender's face. When the isolate was the sender and a normal monkey the receiver, the normal monkey responded whether the light was on or not, perhaps because the isolate made so many fearful facial expressions the receiver could not distinguish when the light was on. Miller and his colleagues concluded, 'a major factor in the social inadequacy of monkeys reared in isolation is the lack of opportunity to acquire the requisite communicative skills' (Miller, Caul, &amp; Mirsky, 1967, p. 239).

My role in Miller's laboratory was to adapt the communication of affect procedure to human participants. We did so in the Slide-Viewing Technique (SVT), in which participants in the role of senders viewed a series of emotional images (initially, Sexual , Scenic , Pleasant People , Unpleasant , and Unusual ), verbally described the emotional response that each image evoked, and rated their emotional response to the image on a series of scales. Unknown to them, they were filmed by a hidden camera and other participants in the role of receivers judged the type of image viewed and rated the sender's feelings on the same scales. This yielded two measures of emotion

communication accuracy: the number of images correctly categorized ( percent correct measure ) and the correlation between the sender's ratings of their feeling and the receiver' ratings, computed across the images. The latter emotion correlation measure enabled communication scores for specific emotions: happiness, sadness, fear, anger, etc. correlations (Wagner, Buck, &amp; Winterbotham, 1993).

## 3.1 Initial Studies

Studies in adults demonstrated accurate communication on both measures, and showed women to be better senders than men overall. Interestingly, poor senders showed evidence of higher autonomic responding than good senders, particularly skin conductance deflections, reflecting a pattern of internalizing versus externalizing modes of emotional expression that has been described since the 1920s (Buck, 1979). Women tended to show externalizing patterns, with relatively high sending accuracy and low autonomic responding, while men tended to show internalizing patterns. Sending accuracy also positively related to personality measures of extraversion and self-esteem (Buck, Miller, &amp; Caul, 1974; Buck, Savin, Miller, &amp; Caul, 1972).

Wefollowed up with studies in preschool children aged 3.5 -6 years. The images we showed children included Familiar People (pictures of friends in the preschool), as well as Unfamiliar People , mildly Unpleasant , and Unusual pictures. Mothers brought the children to the laboratory and served as receivers. Later, we showed the videotaped expressions to groups of university students who did not know the children. Results showed significant communication to both mother and students, with no sex differences when the mother was observing, and girls slightly better senders than boys on the percent correct measure to the students. There were substantial individual differences in sending accuracy in the children, but these did not strongly relate to biological sex as they had with adults. As with adults, sending accuracy negatively correlated with skin conductance responding, but the sex differences in externalizing versus internalizing patterns of response were not significant. Interestingly, sending accuracy negatively correlated with age among boys but not girls, suggesting that the sex difference in sending accuracy in adults may be due to sex-role-related social learning (Buck, 1977).

Individual differences in sending accuracy did relate to teachers' ratings of the children's behavior in the preschool. Sending accuracy positively

related to ratings of aggressiveness, rebelliousness, bossiness, openness, activity level, having many friends, and extraversion; and negatively related to ratings of shyness, inhibition, control, quietness, cooperativeness, and introversion (Buck, 1975). Factor analysis of this Affect Expression Rating scale (AERS) showed three factors: Expressive versus Inhibited, Antagonistic versus Cooperative, and Independent versus Dependent. Interestingly, Expressiveness positively related to sending accuracy and negatively related to skin conductance responding in boys; while in girls, the Antagonistic dimension positively related to sending accuracy and negatively related to skin conductance (Buck, 1977). This observation prompted conjecture that teachers may regard the same behavior as expressive in boys and antagonistic in girls, which led to the general hypothesis of sex differences in socialization and emotional education summarized previously.

## 3.2 Studies in Brain-Damaged Patients

As a measure of communication, the slide-viewing technique is unusual in eliciting non-voluntary behaviors in senders. Senders sit alone with the instruction that the study involves the relationship between physiological responses and their verbal report of their emotional experience: the camera is intentionally unobtrusive so the sender does not realize that her nonverbal behavior is observed. a Wetherefore assume that any expression relates to the sender's reaction to the emotional stimulus. This relates to an issue in the clinical and research literature concerning nonverbal behavior in aphasia caused by damage to the left hemisphere (LH) of the brain. On one hand, these patients show deficits in expressing and/or recognizing behaviors widely considered 'nonverbal,' such as pantomime, gestures, and mimicry (Goodglass &amp; Kaplan, 1963). On the other hand, there is evidence that 'emotional utterance' expressing a presently existing emotion may be relatively intact (Critchley, 1970).

To investigate this, Aphasiologist Robert Duffy and I performed the slide-viewing technique in male veterans who were afflicted with lefthemisphere damage and aphasia (LHD), right-hemisphere damage (RHD), Parkinson's disease (in which a lack of facial expression is a clinical symptom), and non-brain-damaged Control patients (Buck &amp; Duffy, 1980). Familiar People slides showed nurses and recreation personnel, which elicited strongly positive responses. We presented the images without formal verbal

a There is a re-consent process after the experiment where we reveal the existence of the camera, and participants agree to the use of their filmed expressions for research.

instructions, simply asking patients to watch a series of slides, and filmed their reactions from behind a one-way mirror. Student receivers viewed the videotaped expressions and guessed the type of slide viewed on each trial. Results showed that sending accuracy in the LHD patients did not significantly differ from Control patients, while both RHD and Parkinson's disease groups showed significant deficits. Moreover, the pattern of sending accuracy across slide categories differed for LHD patients and the other groups. Fig. 5 shows that most groups showed the greatest sending accuracy on the Familiar People slides, and chance performance on the Unpleasant slides: indeed, communication accuracy of Control patients overlapped with that of preschool children. In contrast, the LHD group showed relatively constant sending accuracy across the slide categories. It is possible that the differential expressiveness across slide categories was due to display rules that cause most people to modulate their display to be more expressive on

Fig. 5 Percent of slides correctly categorized across slide categories for lefthemisphere-damaged aphasia patients, controls, right-hemisphere-damaged patients, Parkinson ' s disease patients, and normal preschool children.

<!-- image -->

pleasant and familiar slides and inhibit their display to unpleasant slides. If this is the case, the LHD patients did not respond to these display rules: compared to Control patients they were relatively lower in sending accuracy on Familiar People slides and higher on Unpleasant slides. A possible explanation is that emotions are associated with right-hemisphere processing, while intentional control of display is associated with the left hemisphere (Ross, Homan, &amp; Buck, 1994).

## 3.3 Communication: Symbolic, Spontaneous, and Pseudo-spontaneous

These observations led to the formal definition of two simultaneous 'streams' of communication: symbolic communication based on the left hemisphere, and spontaneous communication based on the right hemisphere (Buck &amp; Van Lear, 2002). In symbolic communication, the sender intentionally encodes a message into symbols, which the receiver decodes to extract the message (see Fig. 6). Symbolic communication must be learned by both sender and receiver, it is intentional at some level, it is composed of symbols which have an arbitrary socially defined relationship with the referent (e.g., the word 'tree' in English and the object), and its content consists of propositions , defined as statements that can be logically analyzed. As the simplest kind of logical analysis is the test of truth or falsity, a proposition is simply a statement that can be false (e.g., 'the tree is blue'). Language is the most obvious example of symbolic communication, but many nonverbal behaviors including sign language and pantomime are intentional and propositional.

Fig. 6 Symbolic, spontaneous, and pseudospontaneous (posing) communication. From Figure 2 in Buck, R., &amp; Powers, S. R. (2013). Encoding and display: A developmentalinteractionist model of nonverbal sending accuracy. In J. A. Hall &amp; M. L. Knapp (Eds.), Nonverbal Communication. pp. 403 -440.

<!-- image -->

In contrast, spontaneous communication is unlearned and based on innate displays in senders and preattunements to those displays in receivers. The display is a sign of a motivational -emotional state, defined as an externally accessible aspect of that state. Therefore, if the sign is there, the motivational -emotional state must be present by definition, so that it cannot be false. The receiver is preattuned to 'know' the meaning of the display: that is, the receiver 'picks up' the sender's motivational -emotional state directly and automatically as a social affordance. For example, mirror neuron systems afford a direct grasp of the feelings and intentions of others: '(the) mirror mechanism … gives us an experiential insight into other minds' (Gallese, Keysers, &amp; Rizzolatti, 2004, p. 401). In spontaneous communication, this receiving process is not intentional, but is the basis for emotional empathy (Buck, Powers, &amp; Hull, 2017).

On the other hand, it is clear that people sometimes display emotions they do not actually feel. This is posing in Fig. 6, where the sender intentionally enacts a display in accordance with display rules. Ekman and Friesen (1975) pointed out that the sender can modulate the display (showing more or less than is actually felt), qualify a display (showing an 'unfelt' display as a comment on a felt display), and falsify a display by neutralizing (poker face), simulating an unfelt display, or masking a felt display with an unfelt display. From the point of view of senders, this is intentional, but to the extent that they are successful in putting on a convincing display, receivers may respond as if the display is spontaneous. Buck and Van Lear (2002) termed this pseudospontaneous communication and suggested that it may be a basis of charisma and of classical as opposed to Method or Stanislavsky acting.

## 3.4 Other Studies

We have applied the slide-viewing technique to other patient populations, including emotionally and behaviorally disordered children and schizophrenia patients. These studies demonstrated that self-rated emotion and emotions rated by others is slightly inappropriate in these samples (more negative on positive images and more positive on negative images: average r -effect sizes ¼ 0.16 and 0.19, respectively), while their communication is more strongly deficient (average r -effect size ¼ 0.44). Specifically, emotionally and behaviorally disordered children demonstrate deficits in communicating anger and schizophrenia patients show deficits in communicating fear (Buck, Goldman, Easton, &amp; Norelli Smith, 1998; see Buck &amp; Miller, 2016 for a review).

## 3.5 Conclusions

Spontaneous and pseudo-spontaneous communication takes motivational -emotional states outside the individual into the social realm, with numerous consequences that are poorly understood, and often overlooked or taken for granted. In the remainder of this article I consider the implications of spontaneous emotion communication to other phenomena in the literature on motivation and emotion: specifically, to the understanding of the social buffering of stress, risky decision-making, motivation for media use, and implications of the communicative gene hypothesis for understanding empathy and altruism.

<!-- image -->

## 4. HEALTH IMPLICATIONS OF COMMUNICATING MOTIVATIONAL -EMOTIONAL STATES

## 4.1 The Stress -Disease Relationship

There is extensive evidence that stress, personality, and other psychosocial factors are involved both in the susceptibility to a range of illnesses and resilience or the ability to cope with them. In a summary of this research, I organized studies of emotional factors in illness into three areas: effects of life change on illness, effects of social support on illness, and the role of individual differences in illness (Buck, 1988a, 1993). The latter included the Type-A behavior pattern associated with cardiovascular disease, the Type C behavior pattern associated with cancer, and alexithymia (no words for mood) associated with psychosomatic illness. I suggested that a common thread running through all these areas is a disruption in emotional communication. Life changes (even outwardly positive life changes like marriage and having a baby) can change expectations or rules about what one is feeling and how to respond to others, and such changes can be a source of stress (Holmes &amp; Rahe, 1967). Conversely, the supportive presence of others can buffer the physiological response to stress and increase resistance to illness (Bovard, 1959; Sarason, Levine, Basham, &amp; Sarason, 1983), and this is often associated with increased emotional communication accuracy. In the TypeA behavior pattern, people show suppressed hostility in negative facial expressions, postures, and tones of voice that may turn others away (Friedman &amp; Rosenman, 1974). In the Type C pattern, described as being 'pathologically nice' (Renneker, 1981), people suppress negative emotions behind a fac ¸ ade of calmness, pleasantness, compliance, submissiveness, and patience (Branda ˜o, Tavares, Schulz, &amp; Matos, 2016; Montes-Nogueira,

Guti /C19 errez-Ospina, &amp; Romo-Gonza ´lez, 2017). Finally, in alexithymia, associated with psychosomatic disorders such as certain forms of headache, ulcer, colitis, and asthma, there is inability to describe one's feelings in words (Nemiah &amp; Sifneos, 1970). In all these cases, emotional communication suffers.

## 4.2 The Expressive Writing Paradigm

Along with the evidence that deficits in emotional communication may be associated with susceptibility to illness is evidence that certain kinds of emotional expression may have opposite effects. Research using the expressive writing paradigm has demonstrated that writing or talking about personal emotional experiences can lead to significant improvements in both subjective and objective measures of physical and mental health, including immune system measures (Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser, &amp; Glaser, 1988; Petrie, Booth, Pennebaker, Davison, &amp; Thomas, 1995). In this paradigm, participants write about their 'very deepest thoughts and feelings about an extremely important emotional issue...' (Pennebaker, 1997, p. 162), as opposed to writing about superficial topics. Participants typically write in the laboratory for 3 -5 consecutive days, 15 -30min per day. Feedback is not necessary: significant effects occurred even when participants wrote on a 'magic pad' upon which the writing disappears (Czajka, 1987). Positive effects of expressive writing appear to be robust, generalizing across settings, individual differences, ages, education levels, and ethnicities/cultures (Baikie &amp; Wilhelm, 2005; Frattaroli, 2006; Frisina, Borod, &amp; Lepore, 2004).

Although the body of research demonstrating the effectiveness of expressive writing is impressive, the mechanisms underlying these effects are unclear: as Pennebaker (2004) put it, 'no single theory appears to account for the effectiveness of the writing paradigm' (p. 138). A hypothesis that writing reduced emotional inhibition with subsequent stress-reducing effects has not been supported (Pennebaker, 1989; Pennebaker, Hughes, &amp; O'Heeron, 1987). Word counts distinguished negative emotion words ( angry ), positive emotion words ( happy , laugh ), causal words ( because , reason ), and insight words ( understand , realize : Pennebaker &amp; Francis, 1996). Analyses revealed three linguistic factors predicting improved physical health: more positive emotion words; a moderate number of negative emotion words; and increases in causal and insight words over the course of writing (Pennebaker, Mayne, &amp; Francis, 1997). In Frattaroli's (2006) extensive

meta-analysis, the theory that received most support was exposure theory that argued that if one repeatedly relives thoughts and feelings about negative experiences, those thoughts and feelings would tend to extinguish. Exposure theory predicted that disclosure would be particularly effective for relieving posttraumatic stress symptoms and for participants with a history of trauma, and effects would be larger with a greater number and duration of exposure sessions, and the data supported these predictions.

I suggest the mechanisms underlying expressive writing effects involve a more active process than extinction: emotional education. The expressive writing paradigm encourages affect labeling, understanding, and education after a specific emotionally charged situation has occurred. Essentially, participants educate themselves based upon their reflections on their own experiences in highly emotional situations. They explore, label, and understand the feelings and desires they had experienced, from a detached, objective, and mindful point of view.

There is some evidence that affect labeling can have beneficial effects. In a study with a behavioral measure of fear, Kircanski, Lieberman, and Craske (2012) showed that affect labeling was better able to reduce skin conductance responses to spiders in spider-phobic persons than emotional reappraisal or distraction. Interestingly, affect labeling did not reduce selfreported fear, and in fact, a greater use of fear and anxiety-related words during exposure to the spider was associated with a greater reduction in behavioral fear response. They concluded, 'Perhaps surprisingly, affect labeling may help to regulate aspects of emotion in a clinical context' (p. 1086). This counterintuitive finding is similar to that of Iwamitsu et al. (2005a, 2005b) and Iwamitsu and Buck (2008) who found that women who labeled and expressed their initial aggression and anxiety showed less distress during the course of cancer diagnosis.

<!-- image -->

## 5. MOTIVATIONAL -EMOTIONAL STATES IN DECISION-MAKING AND RISK

## 5.1 Unreasoned Actions and Unplanned Behaviors

Affect labeling may improve health-related decision-making. Decisionmaking involves choosing an optimal course of action when multiple alternatives are available, and such choices usually involve risk, defined as uncertainty about outcomes with known probabilities. A model of homo economicus long dominated decision theory and economic theory in general, portraying humans as rational and self-interested agents who seek to maximize utility and profit. These approaches often regard emotion as disrupting

rational consideration and undermining optimal decision-making. For example, the Theory of Reasoned Action (Fishbein &amp; Ajzen, 1975) and Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1991) assume rational actors, and studies of health decisions often employ these approaches. However, behaviors involved in health-relevant decisions are often neither reasoned nor planned.

In recent decades there has been increasing recognition that emotions influence decision-making in varied ways. Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) prospect theory proposed that emotions are anticipated as outcomes of decisions, and that perceived losses cause greater emotional effects than equal perceived gains, resulting in loss aversion bias. Moreover, Loewenstein and Lerner's (2003) risk as feelings hypothesis suggested that when there is tension between rational evaluations and feelings, behavior tends to be determined by feelings (Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, &amp; Welch, 2001). Also, McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein, and Cohen (2004) showed that separate neural systems are involved in decisions involving immediately available versus delayed rewards, with parts of the limbic system associated with the former, while regions of the lateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices are engaged regardless of delay.

With the new appreciation of the importance of emotion, it is important to consider the conditions under which emotions facilitate or disrupt efficient decision-making (Buck, Chaudhuri, Georgson, &amp; Kowta, 1995; Buck &amp; Ferrer, 2012). Unfortunately, the conceptualization of emotion in the decision literature is generally oversimplified. For example, the experience of situations of risk described in the risk as feelings hypothesis are framed rather simply in terms of anticipated experiences of positive or negative evaluative feelings (Lerner &amp; Keltner, 2000). However, affective neuroscience has distinguished positive and negative individualist emotions (e.g., SEEKING, RAGE, FEAR), positive and negative prosocial emotions (e.g., PANIC, PLAY, LUST, PANIC), and reptilian emotions (e.g., sex and aggression: Buck, 1988a, 1999, 2014; Panksepp, 1998, Panksepp &amp; Biven, 2012).

Emotions can influence decision-making in several ways. Anticipatory emotions are responses to potential outcomes experienced at the time of the decision (Bagozzi, Baumgartner, &amp; Pieters, 1998). These may involve mixed feelings, when erotic excitement may be mixed with worry about the possibility of sexually transmitted disease. In addition, anticipated emotions refer to future emotions anticipated at the time of decision. Though not actually experienced at the time of the decision, they can contribute to rational decision-making, and contribute to the experience of anticipatory emotions (Loewenstein &amp; Lerner, 2003; Loewenstein et al., 2001). Also,

incidental emotions unrelated to the decision may also be experienced at the time of the decision. For example, one may feel generally happy or sad, and such moods may influence decision-making (Harle &amp; Sanfey, 2007). A lively party atmosphere on spring break with alcohol, loud music, and dancing may make the anticipation of erotic excitement more likely; and the anticipation of worry, dread, and anxiety less likely, at the point of a critical decision (Ariely &amp; Loewenstein, 2006). Finally, there are cases where the feelings and desires in themselves present the risks. In Festinger's (1957) cognitive dissonance theory, subjective feelings ('I am confident') can alter judgments about the environment ('it is safe'), and such subjective feelings are generally expected to be more stable than judgments about the environment. If one feels specific emotions, one will tend to look for elements in the situation to explain them and overlook dissonant elements, so that one's feelings and desires often mold one's attitudes. Thus, people may be tempted to engage in risky behavior by sexual desires, or (false) perceptions of hunger, or feelings of power, or experiences of curiosity or wanting.

Perceptions and judgments shape anticipated, anticipatory, incidental, and risky emotions in a variety of ways. Many risky situations by their very nature are uncommon and unusual, so that they may well be novel to a given individual. As I explore in the next section, media models play a part in emotional education, but expecting the provision of sober, accurate, and balanced accounts of the pros and cons of risky situations via media is problematic. Indeed, media often present dangerous risks in exciting, stimulating, and humorous contexts. In a meta-analysis of media depictions of risky behavior, Fischer, Greitemeyer, Kastenmuller, Vongrincic, and Saur (2011) found that risky media depictions encouraged risk-taking behaviors and risk-positive emotions and attitudes. This was particularly true for exposure to active (e.g., video games) than passive (music, film) media content. Moreover, media often present sexual behaviors by allusion and innuendo, and mention of safe sexual practices is rare. In 2005, out of the 68% of television shows that showed sexual content, only 15% discussed risk and responsibility (Common Sense Media, 2012). The treatment of spring break by MTV is a case in point.

## 5.2 TEEMs, Warning, and Emotional Inoculation

We may leverage principles from emotional education and the expressive writing paradigm to design more effective warnings. When strong and novel feelings and desires occur in a risky situation, people may often be unprepared. As noted, in addition to being risky in their own right,

unexamined feelings may initiate an environmental search, leading to informal social comparison with others as a way to identify and understand the feelings (Festinger, 1950, 1954; Schachter &amp; Singer, 1962). Displays of other persons can exert powerful influences on labeling and understanding one's own feelings and desires, potentially contributing to group mind effects (Gantt &amp; Agazarian, 2011; Le Bon, 1896). Such social comparisons can put the individual at particular risk, ignoring apparently obvious rules of conduct and safety concerns: instead following the crowd in performing prohibited or risky behaviors.

Targeted Emotional Education Modules (TEEMs) involve brief messages about the kinds of specific emotions typically experienced in specific risky situations. We may present these, not after a traumatic situation as in the expressive writing paradigm, but before a person encounters a specific risky situation. This may enable the individual to learn about and consider anticipatory, anticipated, incidental, and risky emotions beforehand in a setting conducive to mindful affect labeling and analysis. The result I suggest can be emotional inoculation , which hopefully can avoid impulsive actions based upon strong, novel, and unexpected emotions.

## 5.3 The Safer-Sex Communication (SAFECOMM) Scale

The TEEM approach begins by determining emotions that people report experiencing in specific risky situations, capitalizing on principles of crowdsourcing to ask large numbers of people about emotions anticipated in those situations. For example, Buck et al. (2004) used the Safer-Sex Communication (SAFECOMM) scale to ask college students in America and India about the emotions people experience in risky sexual situations (protected or unprotected sex in a one-night stand, with a friend, or with a committed partner). Results revealed a wide range of specific individualist, prosocial, and reptilian emotions involved in sex, with remarkably few differences between students from America and India in anticipated emotions. In both cultures, condom use was associated with greater caring but less intimacy , and women reported greater feelings of power and lower feelings of anger relative to men when condoms were used. Emotions like fear decreased as relationships became more stable, while emotions such as confidence increased with relational stability. Ferrer, Fisher, Buck, and Amico (2011) used the Buck et al. (2004) results to design a brief video message depicting an informal conversation about emotions experienced in risky sexual situations. She evaluated whether the addition of this intervention to a traditional safer sex intervention increased reported condom use. At

6 months' post-intervention, individuals in the emotional education intervention arm reported significantly increased condom use compared with both the traditional intervention and a no-intervention comparison group.

## 5.4 The User Affective Experience (UAX) Scale

Virtually all surfers of the Web experience interruptions by unexpected popup messages, which seek to warn users about software vulnerabilities. However, users consistently ignore such messages, and often express annoyance at the interruption. The understanding of such user experience (UX) is a core goal in studies of human -computer interaction, but studies are plagued by problems of conceptualization, definition, and measurement (Lallemand, Gronier, &amp; Koenig, 2015). Many agree that UX has emotional aspects, and as with the SAFECOMM scale we employed principles of crowdsourcing to develop the User Affective Experience (UAX) scale (Buck, Khan, Fagan, &amp; Coman, 2017).

Weasked a diverse sample of 400 participants about emotions they experienced to unexpected pop-up warnings that appeared while Relaxed surfing the web or Pressured working on an important task under time pressure. We asked about 45 emotions, including positive and negative Individualist and Prosocial emotions, and reptilian Power emotions. We used exploratory structural equation modeling to reveal four factors describing the pattern of responses: Positive emotions ( confident , secure ); Anxiety ( nervous , anxious ); Hostility ( disdainful , scornful ); and Loneliness ( ashamed , abandoned ). Women reported more Anxiety , and men reported more Hostility and Loneliness . We noted that positive and negative prosocial emotions that involve social comparisons of relative success and failure and are therefore essentially selfish (e.g., proud , admiring , guilty , embarrassed ) did not significantly differentiate between Relaxed and Pressured conditions; but positive and negative prosocial emotions that emphasize community (e.g., respectful , grateful , lonely , abandoned ) did. This suggested a distinction between selfish and communal prosocial emotions, and that a potential TEEM seeking to increase compliance with pop-up warnings by emphasizing civility and protection of the community of users may be more effective than messages emphasizing selfish individual advantage.

## 5.5 Predictions

The expressive writing literature allows specific predictions about effects of TEEMs. We expect that TEEM modules and expressive writing complement one another. Specifically, we hypothesize that exposure to a TEEM

module will increase the linguistic quality of disclosure as measured by word counts: e.g., producing more positive emotion words, a moderate number of negative emotion words, and an increase in causal and insight words. Moreover, we hypothesize that this effect will be greatest in the specific topic of the TEEM module: a TEEM module about safer sex will not necessarily generalize to writing about binge drinking, although this is an empirical issue of interest. Furthermore, we expect that the TEEM modules will lead to objective improvements in subjective and objective measures of physical and mental health similar to those of expressive writing, and that a combination of the two techniques may be particularly effective. The expressive writing literature also suggests principles potentially useful in the construction of the TEEMs. While negative emotions should be addressed, there should be an emphasis on positive emotions where possible, including positive prosocial emotions such as liking and caring; positive individualist emotions such as happiness, security, and confidence; and positive communal emotions such as gratitude, respect, and trust (see Buck et al., 2017). In addition, there should be an emphasis on encouraging insight and understanding regarding the causes of, and responses to, emotions.

The TEEM approach is theoretically grounded and empirically based, yet practical, flexible, applicable to many populations, and relatively inexpensive. The approach recognizes the potency and potential danger of informal social comparison in shaping collective emotional responses when feelings and desires encountered in a situation are novel and strong. Moreover, the TEEM approach allows for the understanding of complex and often outwardly incompatible patterns of feelings, accepting them as normal given the situation so that they do not need to be suppressed but they do not need to be acted upon either. It allows individuals to linguistically represent and more clearly display and express these feelings in ways that are authentic, appropriate, and adaptive. The goal is to help the individual to use subjectively experienced feelings and desires as informative signs rather than impulsive urges, and therefore to be inoculated from the most problematic aspects of strong emotion.

<!-- image -->

## 6. MEDIA COMMUNICATION AND EMOTIONAL EDUCATION

## 6.1 Emotions in Relationships: Silly Love Songs

In emotional education, a child learns a vocabulary for labeling and understanding her feelings and desires via social biofeedback from caregivers. At puberty, the maturation of sexual systems brings with it new feelings and

desires that are difficult to share directly and openly with 'official' socialization agents such as parents and teachers, and these feelings and desires naturally involve other people: friends, lovers, and rivals. Learning how to label and understand these newly experienced feelings and desires in the context of new and unfamiliar social relationships is accompanied by increased interest in communication media of all sorts, including literature, drama, and perhaps above all, music; including a phenomenon largely taken for granted in the social and behavioral sciences: silly love songs.

Paul McCartney reportedly wrote the song 'Silly Love Songs' in 1976 as a response to John Lennon's disparagement of lightweight music not relevant to social issues. The huge popularity of such songs begs the question, ' why is the world filled with silly love songs?' This is an important question for motivation and emotion science, and relates to a broader question of why media content in general so strongly motivates people. A possible explanation is that love songs and other media content serve important functions of vicarious emotional education: enabling the exploration of strong feelings and desires in the context of personal and social relationships that are otherwise rarely encountered and difficult to share. Silly love songs can have the serious function of allowing us to explore feelings associated with attraction, affection, fulfillment, and love; as well as rebuff, rejection, betrayal, loss, and isolation (Buck &amp; Powers, 2011).

People cannot easily express many feelings and desires in direct face-toface interaction, including socially dangerous sexual and aggressive feelings and potentially inappropriate or embarrassing feelings of love, affection and bonding. In addition, feelings associated with serious illness are intrinsically difficult to share. The same is true of feelings associated with social loss: loneliness, separation, and isolation caused by rejection, absence, or bereavement. Media are relevant because they afford a way of exploring complex and relatively rare feelings in the context of a wide variety of personal and social relationships.

## 6.2 Measuring Emotional Appeals in Songs: The EGrats Scale

To assess whether specific emotions contribute to liking specific media content, we asked participants to rate the emotions elicited by MTV music videos on the Emotional Uses and Gratifications (EGrats) scale (Strizhakova et al., 2003). We also asked whether they liked the music video (Buck, 1988b). We defined emotional appeal as a positive correlation between rating of a specific emotion and rating of liking: thus, a positive correlation

Table 1 Pearson Correlations Between Rated Emotion and Rated Liking for Three Music Videos

|               | Lionel Richie   | Lionel Richie   | Rolling Stones   | Rolling Stones   | Big Country   | Big Country   |
|---------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|------------------|---------------|---------------|
| Rated Emotion | Males           | Females         | Males            | Females          | Males         | Females       |
| Happy         | 0.89 a          | 0.73 a          | 0.63 a           | 0.02             | /C0 0.20      | 0.52 a        |
| Sad           | /C0 0.41 a      | /C0 0.45 a      | 0.09             | /C0 0.10         | 0.51 a        | 0.01          |
| Afraid        | /C0 0.22        | 0.03            | 0.13             | /C0 0.19         | 44 a          | /C0 0.04      |
| Angry         | /C0 0.35        | 0.04            | /C0 09           | /C0 0.42 a       | 0.52 a        | /C0 0.14      |
| Surprised     | 0.14            | 0.28            | 0.30             | 0.03             | 0.19          | 0.29          |
| Disgusted     | /C0 0.37 a      | /C0 0.01        | /C0 0.01         | /C0 0.36 a       | 0.32          | 0.06          |
| Sexual        | 0.06            | 0.20            | 0.21             | 0.46 a           | /C0 0.09      | 0.15          |
| Powerful      | 0.01            | 0.53 a          | 0.54 a           | 0.54 a           | /C0 0.10      | 0.05          |
| Interested    | 0.62 a          | 0.77 a          | 0.61 a           | 0.63 a           | 0.82 a        | 0.85 a        |
| Bored         | /C0 0.76 a      | /C0 0.64 a      | /C0 0.54 a       | /C0 0.46 a       | /C0 0.58 a    | /C0 0.37 a    |

a P &gt; 0.05 participants were 23 male and 26 female college students.

between ratings of happiness and liking suggested that people liked the video if it made them happy, or it had a 'happiness appeal.' In a study conducted during the 1980s, seven music videos with differing emotional appeals were viewed by participants who rated the emotions elicited by the video and their liking of the video (Buck, 1988b; see Table 1). Lionel Ritchie's well-known 'All Night Long,' had happiness appeal for both women and men, with ratings of happiness strongly correlating with ratings of liking (average r ¼ 0.81). A video with strong aggressive content-Rolling Stones' 'Under Cover of the Night'-showed happiness appeal for men ( r ¼ 0.63) but not women; and it showed power appeal for both women and men, in that liking was correlated with ratings of power (average r ¼ 0.54). An antiwar video, 'Fields of Fire' by Big Country, showing a child playing with toy soldiers inter-cut with scenes of combat, had happiness appeal for women ( r ¼ 0.52), but for men liking was positively correlated with ratings of sadness , fear , and anger ( rs ¼ 0.51, 0.44, 0.52, respectively). Therefore, men liked 'Fields of Fire' if it made them feel sad, afraid, and angry.

In contrast, ratings of two emotions correlated with liking across all seven videos for both genders: liking positively correlated with interest (average

r ¼ 0.62) and negatively correlated with boredom (average r ¼/C0 0.56). A replication study, conducted with a new set of videos during the 1990s, supported these results (Pulaski, 1999): different videos showed distinct emotional appeals, but liking again positively correlated with rated interest (average r ¼ 0.61) and negatively correlated with rated boredom (average r ¼/C0 0.43). In both studies, different videos had different emotional appeals, but across all the videos in both studies, people liked them if the music made them interested and disliked them if the music made them bored. This suggests that listening to silly love songs, and perhaps more broadly exposure to music and entertainment in general, is a kind of exploratory behavior where one is exploring, labeling, and coming to understand one's own feelings and desires in situations that are rare in real life.

## 6.3 The Appeal of ' Negative ' Media Depictions

From this point of view, a major factor in the pleasure of entertainment may be curiosity in the pursuit of emotional exploration and emotional education. This may account for the otherwise seemingly odd appeal of 'negative' emotions in media. The more fear elicited by a horror show, the more tears elicited by a tearjerker, the more anger and sense of power elicited by an action -adventure movie, the more sexual arousal elicited by an erotic depiction, the better they are generally regarded. Of course, there are people who will not go near certain media content: some avoid horror films and others avoid tearjerkers. Perhaps these individuals do not need or want to explore certain feelings.

This suggests an alternative view of the effects of sexual and violent content on media. There is much research suggesting that such depictions are associated with temporary increases in tendencies toward sexual and aggressive actions. For example, the Pornography Commission studies of the 1960s consistently demonstrated, in a variety of groups, increases in reported sexual behavior following the viewing of erotic depictions (see review in Buck, 1988a), and studies of the effects of violent films consistently find evidence of increases in violent tendencies, and decreases in reported empathy for victims (Anderson &amp; Bushman, 2002). However, there is little evidence of long-term increases in sexual or violent crimes as erotic and violent depictions have increased in availability and explicitness (Ferguson, 2015). If a major motive in exposure to sexual and violent content in media is indeed emotional education in the service of emotional competence, the

major policy implications would be, not to censor such content, but rather to assure that the lessons delivered by such content affords accurate, effective, and responsible emotional education.

<!-- image -->

## 7. THE COMMUNICATIVE GENE HYPOTHESIS: EMPATHY AND ALTRUISM

## 7.1 Classical Ethology and Communication

We saw that Developmental -Interactionist theory emphasizes that motivational and emotional phenomena are 'out there' in the communicative social environment, as well as confined within the individual organism. Darwin (1998/1872) assumed that the communication of certain motivational -emotional states is adaptive to a species. That is, individuals who show evidence of that state in displays, and individuals who respond appropriately to these displays, tend to be favored. Over generations, these behaviors are ritualized into displays, and perceptual systems of species members become preattuned to the pickup of these displays (Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1975). This reasoning is consistent with Gibson's (1966) theory that displays are social affordances and co-evolve with perceptual systems (McArthur &amp; Baron, 1983). Moreover, Darwin recognized compassion and moral sensitivity-'social instincts and sympathies'-as critical to the social order, stating, 'the emotion of love … is one of the strongest of which the mind is capable' (1998/1872, p. 212).

## 7.2 The Selfish Gene Critique

Scholars challenged the view of classical ethology when they interpreted selection as operating at the level of the gene. Trivers (1971) argued that fitness is based upon inclusive fitness -the survival of the organism's genes-not the survival of the individual organism. Dawkins (1982) argued that the unit of evolutionary selection is an active , germ-line replicator : something whose activities determine whether copies are made of it across the span of evolutionary time. He argued that the gene is the only active replicator lasting across evolutionary timescales, so that the 'selfish gene' is the ultimate unit of selection, a replicator motivated only to make copies of itself. This perspective implied that selection operates against individuals who show displays that are highly predictive of their true motivational/emotional states. Dawkins and Krebs (1978) viewed animal communication as 'a means by which one animal (an 'actor') exploits another animal's ('reactor's')

muscle power' (Krebs &amp; Dawkins, 1984, pp. 380 -381). They suggested an analogy between animal communication and human advertising, where the object is persuasion rather than transfer of information.

## 7.3 Defining the Replicator

In the selfish gene view, true altruism, where one sacrifices genetic fitness in favor of another, is a biological impossibility. In the memorable words of biologist Michael Ghiselin, 'Scratch an 'altruist,' and watch a 'hypocrite' bleed' (1974, p. 247). Dawkins (1976) wrote, 'Be warned that if you wish, as I do, to build a society in which individuals cooperate generously and unselfishly towards a common good, you can expect little help from biological nature. I am not advocating morality based on evolution. Let us try to teach generosity and altruism, because we are born selfish' (p. 3). This issue turns on the issue of the unit of selection: whether the unit of selection truly is the individual gene, or whether evolution can involve the selection of active, germ-line replicators above the level of the individual gene. Wilson and Sober (1994) and Sober &amp; Wilson (1998) proposed group selection as an alternative, but Dawkins (1994) answered that groups cannot be a fundamental unit of selection because they do not last across evolutionary timescales.

A consideration of communication suggests that it is possible to retain a gene-selectionist position without assuming genetic atomism : a largely unexamined assumption that genes are selected singly, in isolation from other genes (Buck, 2007). Benson Ginsburg and I proposed the communicative gene hypothesis, recognizing that genes do not function alone: they function by communicating with other genes (Buck &amp; Ginsburg, 1991). This contention is not controversial: indeed there is increasing interest in gene interactions and regulatory genes that control expression of other genes (see Iba &amp; Noman, 2016). However, the implications regarding the unit of selection have arguably not been appreciated.

In nature, genes are selected by proxy: genes underlying a trait constitute the genotype , while the expression of that trait in behavior is the phenotype selected by evolution. In the case of communication, the behavioral consequences of gene A sending and gene B receiving (C a &gt; b) is the phenotype subject to selection. However, communication involves both individual elements and the dyad-level unique relationship between those elements relative to other elements. For example, the communication accuracy of gene A sending to gene B (C a &gt; b) depends on the ability of gene A to send (Sa) and gene B to receive (Rb), but it also depends in part upon the unique

ability of gene A to send to gene B relative to other genes (U a &gt; b). Correspondingly, the ability of B to send to A depends in part on the ability of B to send (Sb), and of A to receive (Ra), and to the unique ability of B to receive from A (U b &gt; a) relative to other genes. Therefore, both individual and dyad-level components make up the observed phenotype of communication accuracy (Kenny, 1994; Warner, Kenny, &amp; Stoto, 1979):

$$\begin{array} { l } C _ { \ } a > b = S a + R b + U _ { \ } a > b \\ C _ { \ } b > s = S b + R a + U _ { \ } b > a \end{array}$$

## 7.4 Communicative Relationships as Replicators

This has implications for the selfish gene hypothesis because it demonstrates how phenomena above the level of individual genes can become active germ-line replicators. Again, a replicator is anything of which copies are made; an active replicator influences the probability of being copied; a germ-line replicator is an ancestor of descendant replicators; and replicators exist across evolutionary timescales. The communicative relationships (U a &gt; b) and (U b &gt; a) can be replicators in Dawkins's (1982) sense. Communicative relationships between genes are not necessarily within the same cell, or even the same organism. Genes in different cells can communicate within the organism via hormones, and genes in different individuals can communicate via pheromones. These relationships involve displays in senders and preattunements in receivers: in short, spontaneous communication.

In Emotion: A biosocial synthesis (2014), I discussed paleosociality: social behavior and organization of microbes and other relatively simple organisms (see Buck &amp; Powers, 2006). Cyanobacteria, bacteria, slime molds such as Dictyostelium discoideum , sponges, and lobsters demonstrate social behavior manifesting all formal qualities of spontaneous communication. For example, in the quorum sensing of bacteria such as the photoluminescent Vibrio fischeri , autoinducer molecules released into the environment function as objective and valid external signs of the bacterium's presence in the environment. These are displays activating preattunements in the bacteria, altering collective behaviors in adaptive ways, such as activating photoluminescence. Communication functions to enhance the collective survival by the proxy selection, not only of the individual gene, organism, or group; but also by the selection of communicative relationships (Buck, 2011; Buck &amp; Ginsburg, 1991). Specific examples of communicative relationships include the ritualized displays and preattunements of the classical ethological view: dominance and submission, warning, courting, play, and bonding. Unlike groups, these relationships exist across evolutionary timescales.

Because communicative relationships can be replicators, the selfish gene objection to the possibility of true altruism falls away. Altruism can involve true compassion and moral sensitivity, as Darwin thought. An ironic consequence is that an explanation of mutual cooperation made by selfish gene theorists is turned on its head. They explain cooperation as selfish altruism because it fosters the survival of one's own genes via inclusive fitness under conditions of kinship and/or reciprocity (Krebs &amp; Dawkins, 1984). In kin selection, one helps genetically related others; in reciprocity, one helps with expectation of return. In both cases, selection favors the inclusive fitness of both sender and receiver. However, from point of view of the communicative gene hypothesis, rather than underlying altruism, kin selection and reciprocity are ways of restricting empathy and altruism to kin and comrade (Buck &amp; Ginsburg, 1997b). Therefore, ironically, kin selection and reciprocity are not the bases of altruism: rather, they are the bases of xenophobia.

<!-- image -->

## 8. CONCLUSIONS

Kurt Lewin noted that there is nothing so practical as a good theory. New means of observing events in the brain and in the nuances of social interaction have revealed empirical phenomena undreampt of in the philosophy of cognitivist psychology, leaving attempts at theoretical integration far behind. Simple construct validity approaches to defining and operationalizing motivation and emotion, while potentially internally consistent and coherent, may unintentionally erect conceptual stovepipes that cannot relate to other approaches and may be insensitive to new information. The cognitive revolution is over, and a new revolution centered on motivation and emotion has begun.

## REFERENCES

- Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 50 (2), 179 -211. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T.
- Anderson, C. A., &amp; Bushman, B. J. (2002). The effects of media violence on society. Science , 295 , 2377 -2378.
- Argyle, M. (1975). Bodily communication. London, UK: Methuen.
- Ariely, D., &amp; Loewenstein, G. (2006). The heat of the moment: The effect of sexual arousal on sexual decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 19 , 87 -98.
- -
- Arnold, M. B. (1960). Emotion and personality. (Vols.1 2). New York: Columbia University. Bagozzi, R. P., Baumgartner, H., &amp; Pieters, R. (1998). Goal-directed emotions. Cognition and Emotion , 12 , 1 -26.

- Baikie, K. A., &amp; Wilhelm, K. (2005). Emotional and physical health benefits of expressive writing. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment , 11 , 338 -346. https:/ /doi.org/10.1192/ apt.11.5.338.
- Bindra, D. (1968). Neuropsychological interpretation of the effects of drive and incentivemotivation on general activity and instrumental behavior. Psychological Review , 75 (1), 1 -22. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/h0025306.
- Bolles, R. C. (1967). Theory of motivation. New York: Harper &amp; Rowe.
- Bovard, E. (1959). Effects of social stimuli on the response to stress. Psychological Review , 66 , 267 -277.
- Branda ˜o, T., Tavares, R., Schulz, M. S., &amp; Matos, P. M. (2016). Measuring emotion regulation and emotional expression in breast cancer patients: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review , 43 , 114 -127. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.10.002.
- Buck, R. (1975). Nonverbal communication of affect in children. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 31 , 644 -653.
- Buck, R. (1977). Nonverbal communication of affect in preschool, children: Relationships with personality and skin conductance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 35 , 225 -236.
- Buck, R. (1979). Individual differences in nonverbal sending accuracy and electrodermal responding. In R. Rosenthal (Ed.), Skill in nonverbal communication: Individual differences . Cambridge, MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn &amp; Hain.
- Buck, R. (1984). The communication of emotion. New York: Guilford.
- Buck, R. (1985). Prime theory: An integrated view of motivation and emotion. Psychological Review , 92 , 389 -413.
- Buck, R. (1988a). Human motivation and emotion (2nd ed.). . New York: Wiley.
- Buck, R. (1988b). Emotional education and mass media: A new view of the global village. In R. Hawkins, J. Weimann, &amp; S. Pingree (Eds.), Advancing communication sciences: Merging mass and interpersonal processes: Vol. 16. Sage annual reviews of communication research (pp. 44 -76). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
- Buck, R. (1990). William James and current issues in emotion, cognition, and communication. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 16 (4), 612 -625.
- Buck, R. (1993). Emotional communication, emotional competence, and physical illness: A developmental-interactionist view. In H. Traue &amp; J. W. Pennebaker (Eds.), Emotional expressiveness, inhibition, and health (pp. 32 -56). Seattle, WA: Hogrefe and Huber.
- Buck, R. (1999). The biological affects: A typology. Psychological Review , 106 (2), 301 -336.
- Buck, R. (2007). The evolutionary bases of social and moral emotions: Dominance, submission, and true love. In J. P. Forgas, M. Haselton, &amp; W. von Hippel (Eds.), Evolution and the social mind: Evolutionary psychology and social cognition (pp. 89 -106). New York: Psychology Press.
- Buck, R. (2010). Emotion is an entity at both biological and ecological levels: The ghost in the machine is language. Emotion Review , 2 , 286.
- Buck, R. (2011). Communicative genes in the evolution of empathy and altruism. Behavioral Genetics , 41 , 876 -888.
- Buck, R. (2014). Emotion: A biosocial synthesis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Buck, R., Anderson, E., Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Ray, I. (2004). Emotion and reason in persuasion: Applying the ARI model and the CASC scale. Journal of Business Research , 57 , 647 -656. Marketing Communications and Consumer Behavior.
- Buck, R., Chaudhuri, A., Georgson, M., &amp; Kowta, S. (1995). Conceptualizing and operationalizing affect, reason, and involvement in persuasion: The ARI model and the CASC scale. In Vol. 22. Advances in consumer research (pp. 440 -447).
- Buck, R., &amp; Duffy, R. J. (1980). Nonverbal communication of affect in brain-damaged patients. Cortex , 16 , 351 -362.

- Buck, R., &amp; Ferrer, R. (2012). Emotion, warnings, and the ethics of risk communication. In S. Roeser, R. Hillerbrand, P. Sandin, &amp; M. Peterson (Eds.), Handbook of risk theory (pp. 694 -723). New York: Springer.
- Buck, R., &amp; Ginsburg, B. (1991). Emotional communication and altruism: The communicative gene hypothesis. In M. Clark (Ed.), Vol. 12. Altruism. Review of personality and social psychology (pp. 149 -175). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
- Buck, R., &amp; Ginsburg, B. (1997a). Communicative genes and the evolution of empathy. In W. Ickes (Ed.), Empathic accuracy (pp. 17 -43). New York: Guilford.
- Buck, R., &amp; Ginsburg, B. (1997b). Selfish and social emotions as voices of selfish and social genes. In C. S. Carteret al. (Ed.), The integrative neurobiology of affiliation: Vol. 807. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences (pp. 481 -483).
- Buck, R., Goldman, C. K., Easton, C. J., &amp; Norelli Smith, N. (1998). Social learning and emotional education: Emotional expression and communication in behaviorallydisordered children and schizophrenic patients. In W. F. Flack &amp; J. D. Laird (Eds.), Emotions in psychopathology (pp. 298 -314). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Buck, R., Khan, M., Fagan, M., &amp; Coman, E. (2017). The user affective experience scale: Ameasure of emotions anticipated in response to pop-up computer warnings. International Journal of Human -Computer Interaction . https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2017.1314612.
- Buck, R., &amp; Miller, M. (2016). Measuring the dynamic stream of display: Spontaneous and intentional facial expression and communication. In D. Matsumoto, H. C. Hwang, &amp; M. G. Frank (Eds.), APA handbook of nonverbal communication . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
- Buck, R., Miller, R. E., &amp; Caul, W. F. (1974). Sex, personality, and physiological variables in the communication of emotion via facial expression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 30 , 587 -596.
- Buck, R., &amp; Powers, S. R. (2006). The biological foundations of social organization: The dynamic emergence of social structure through nonverbal communication. In V. Manusov &amp; M. Patterson (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of nonverbal communication (pp. 119 -138). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
- Buck, R., &amp; Powers, S. R. (2011). Emotion, media, and the Global Village. In K. Doveling, C. von Scheve, &amp; E. A. Konijn (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of emotions and mass media (pp. 181 -194). London and New York: Routledge.
- Buck, R., Powers, S. R., &amp; Hull, K. S. (2017). Measuring emotional and cognitive empathy using dynamic, naturalistic, and spontaneous emotion displays. Emotion , 17 (7), 1120 -1136. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/emo0000285. (Epub 2017 Mar 30).
- Buck, R., Savin, V. J., Miller, R. E., &amp; Caul, W. F. (1972). Nonverbal communication of affect in humans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 23 , 362 -371.
- Buck, R., &amp; Van Lear, C. A. (2002). Verbal and nonverbal communication: Distinguishing symbolic, spontaneous, and pseudo-spontaneous nonverbal behavior. Journal of Communication , 52 , 522 -541.
- Cannon, W. B., Lewis, J. T., &amp; Britton, S. W. (1927). The dispensability of the sympathetic branch of the autonomic Nervous system. Boston Medical and Surgical Journal , 137 , 514.
- Carver, C. S. (2006). Approach, avoidance, and the self-regulation of affect and action. Motivation and Emotion , 30 , 105 -110.
- Chiew, K. S., &amp; Braver, T. S. (2011). Positive affect versus reward: Emotional and motivational influences on cognitive control. Frontiers of Psychology , 2 , 279. https:/ /doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00279.
- Clynes, M. (1977). Sentics: The touch of emotions. New York: Doubleday/Anchor.
- Common Sense Media (2012). See https:/ /www.commonsensemedia.org/
- Critchley, M. (1970). Aphasiology and other aspects of language. London: John Murray.
- Crocker, L. D., Heller, W., Warren, S. L., O'Hare, A. J., Infantolino, Z. P., &amp; Miller, G. A. (2013). Relationships among cognition, emotion, and motivation: Implications for

- intervention and neuroplasticity in psychopathology. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 (261), 1 -10. https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00261. PMC3678097.
- Cronbach, L. J., &amp; Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin , 52 , 281 -302. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/h0040957.
- Czajka, J. A. (1987). Behavioral inhibition and short-term physiological responses. Unpublished master's thesis Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist University.
- Darwin, C. (1998/1872). In P. Ekman (Ed.), The expression of the emotions in man and animals (3rd ed.). London: Oxford University Press [Original work published 1872].
- Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. New York: Oxford University Press. See also 1989 edition.
- Dawkins, R. (1982). The extended phenotype: The gene as the unit of selection. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Dawkins, R. (1994). Burying the vehicle. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 17 , 616 -617.
- Dawkins, R., &amp; Krebs, J. R. (1978). Animal signals: Information or manipulation? In J. R. Krebs &amp; N. B. Davies (Eds.), Behavioural ecology: An evolutionary approach (pp. 282 -309). Oxford: Blackwell Scientific.
- Dixon, T. (2012). 'Emotion': The history of a keyword in crisis. Emotion Review , 4 , 338 -344.
- Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1975). Ethology: The biology of behavior (2nd ed.). . New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.
- Ekman, P., &amp; Friesen, W. V. (1975). Unmasking the face. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Ferguson, C. J. (2015). Does movie or video game violence predict societal violence? It depends on what you look at and when. Journal of Communication , 65 , 193 -212. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12142.
- Ferrer, R. A., Fisher, J. D., Buck, R., &amp; Amico, K. R. (2011). Adding emotional education to a social-cognitive sexual risk-reduction intervention may sustain behavior change. Health Psychology.
- Festinger, L. (1950). Informal social communication. Psychological Review , 57 , 271 -282.
- Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations , 7 , 117 -140.
- Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
- Fischer, P., Greitemeyer, T., Kastenmuller, A., Vongrincic, C., &amp; Saur, A. (2011). The effects of risk-glorifying media exposure on risk-positive cognitions, emotions, and behaviors: A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin , 137 , 367 -390.
- Fishbein, M., &amp; Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
- Frattaroli, J. (2006). Experimental disclosure and its moderators: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin , 132 (6), 823 -865. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.823.
- Friedman, M., &amp; Rosenman, R. H. (1974). Type-A behavior and your heart. New York: Knopf.
- Frisina, P. G., Borod, J. C., &amp; Lepore, S. J. (2004). A metaanalysis of the effects of written emotional disclosure on the health outcomes of clinical populations. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease , 192 , 629 -634. https:/ /doi.org/10.1097/01.nmd.0000138317.30764.63.
- Gallese, V., Keysers, C., &amp; Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying view of the basis of social cognition. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences , 8 , 396 -403.
- Gantt, S. P., &amp; Agazarian, Y. M. (2011). The group mind, systems-centred functional sub-grouping, and interpersonal neurobiology. In E. Hopper &amp; H. Weinberg (Eds.), Vol. 1. The social unconscious in persons, groups, and societies (pp. 99 -123). London, England: Karnac Books.
- Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
- Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
- Goodglass, H., &amp; Kaplan, E. (1963). Disturbance of gesture and pantomime in aphasia. Brain , 86 , 703 -720.

Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

- Harle, K. M., &amp; Sanfey, A. G. (2007). Incidental sadness biases social economic decisions in the ultimatum game. Emotion , 7 , 876 -881.
- Hertenstein, M., Keltner, D., App, B., Bulleit, A., &amp; Jaskolka, A. (2006). Touch communicates distinct emotions. Emotion , 6 , 528 -533. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/15283542.6.3.528.
- Holmes, T. H., &amp; Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating scale. Psychosomatic Medicine , 11 , 213 -218.
- Iba, H., &amp; Noman, N. (2016). Evolutionary computation in gene regulatory network research. New York: Wiley.
- Iwamitsu, Y., &amp; Buck, R. (2008). Toward psychological intervention for cancer: Emotional suppression, psychological distress, and coping with cancer. In L. K. Jacobs (Ed.), Coping with Cancer (pp. 77 -93). Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers.
- Iwamitsu, Y., Shimoda, K., Abe, H., Tani, T., Okawa, M., &amp; Buck, R. (2005a). Anxiety, emotional suppression, and psychological distress before and after breast cancer diagnosis. Psychosomatics , 46 (1), 1 -6.
- Iwamitsu, Y., Shimoda, K., Abe, H., Tani, T., Okawa, M., &amp; Buck, R. (2005b). The relationship between negative emotional suppression and emotional distress in breast cancer patients. Health Communication , 18 (3), 201 -215.
- Izard, C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. New York: Appleton Century Crofts.
- Izard, C. E. (1977). Human emotions. New York: Plenum.
- James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt and Co.
- Kahneman, D., &amp; Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica , 47 (2), 263 -291.
- Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis. New York: Guilford.
- Kircanski, K., Lieberman, M. D., &amp; Craske, M. G. (2012). Feelings into words: Contributions of language to exposure therapy. Psychological Science , 23 , 1086 -1091. https:/ /doi. org/10.1177/0956797612443830.
- Kleinginna, P. R., &amp; Kleinginna, A. M. (1981a). A categorized list of motivation definitions, with a suggestion for a consensual definition. Motivation and Emotion , 5 (3), 263 -291. https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/BF00993889.
- Kleinginna, P. R., &amp; Kleinginna, A. M. (1981b). A categorized list of emotion definitions, with suggestions for a consensual definition. Motivation and Emotion , 5 (4), 348 -379.
- Krebs, J. R., &amp; Dawkins, R. (1984). Animal signals: Mind-reading and manipulation. In J. R. Krebs &amp; N. B. Davies (Eds.), Behavioural ecology: An evolutionary approach (2nd ed., pp. 380 -402). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
- Lallemand, C., Gronier, G., &amp; Koenig, V. (2015). User experience: A concept without consensus? Exploring practitioners' perspectives through an international survey. Computers in Human Behavior , 43 , 35 -48.
- Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological stress and the coping process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Le Bon, G. (1896). The crowd. London: Ernest Benn.
- LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
- LeDoux, J. E., Sakaguchi, A., &amp; Reis, D. J. (1984). Subcortical efferent projections of the medial geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses conditioned to acoustic stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience , 4 , 683 -698.
- Lerner, J. S., &amp; Keltner, D. (2000). Beyond valence: Toward a model of emotion-specific influences on judgment and choice. Cognition and Emotion , 14 , 473 -493.
- Lindquist, K. A., Siegel, E. H., Quigley, K. S., &amp; Barrett, L. F. (2013). The hundred-year emotion war: Are emotions natural kinds or psychological constructions? Comment on Lench, Flores, and Bench (2011). Psychological Bulletin , 139 (1), 255 -263.

- Lindquist, K. A., Wager, T. D., Kober, H., Bliss-Moreau, E., &amp; Feldman-Barrett, L. (2012). The brain basis of emotion: A meta-analytic review. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 35 (3), 121 -143.
- Loewenstein, G. F., &amp; Lerner, J. S. (2003). The role of affect in decision-making. In R. Davidson, K. Scherer, &amp; H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of affective science (pp. 619 -642). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., &amp; Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin , 127 , 267 -286.
- MacCorquodale, K., &amp; Meehl, P. E. (1948). On a distinction between hypothetical constructs and intervening variables. Psychological Review , 55 , 95 -107.
- Marsh, R. C. (1956). Bertrand Russell: Logic and language. London: Allen &amp; Unwin.
- McArthur, L. Z., &amp; Baron, R. (1983). Toward an ecological theory of social perception. Psychological Review , 90 (3), 215 -238. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.90.3.215.
- McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., &amp; Cohen, J. D. (2004). Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science , 306 (15), 503 -507.
- Miller, M. (2012). Emotion communication using Physical touch: Intentions, symbol system, and individual predispositions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation Storrs, CT, USA: University of Connecticut.
- Miller, R. E., Banks, J., &amp; Ogawa, N. (1962). Communication of affect in 'cooperative conditioning' of rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 64 , 343 -348.
- Miller, R. E., Caul, W. F., &amp; Mirsky, I. A. (1967). Communication of affects between feral and socially isolated monkeys. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 7 , 231 -239.
- Miller, M., Denes, A., Diaz, B., &amp; Buck, R. (2014). Attachment style predicts jealous reactions to viewing touch between a romantic partner and close friend: Implications for internet social communication. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior , 38 , 451 -476. https:/ /doi. org/10.1007/s10919-014-0196-y.
- Montes-Nogueira, I., Guti /C19 errez-Ospina, G., &amp; Romo-Gonza ´lez, T. (2017). Towards a Psychoneuroimmunendocrine hypothesis of breast Cancer. Advances in Neuroimmune Biology , 6 (2016/2017), 153 -160. https:/ /doi.org/10.3233/NIB-170122.
- Nemiah, J. C., &amp; Sifneos, P. E. (1970). Psychosomatic illness: Problem in communication. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics , 18 , 154 -160.
- Niedenthal, P. M., &amp; Brauer, M. (2012). Social functionality of human emotion. Annual Review of Psychology , 63 , 259 -285.
- Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Panksepp, J., &amp; Biven, L. (2012). The archaeology of mind. Ix + (p. 547). New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.
- Parkinson, B. (1997). Untangling the appraisal-emotion connection. Personality and Social Psychology Review , 1 , 62 -79. https:/ /doi.org/10.1207/s15327957pspr0101\_5.
- Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). Confession, inhibition, and disease. In L. Beikowitz (Ed.), Vol. 22. Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 211 -244). New York: Academic Press.
- Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process. Psychological Science , 8 , 164 -166.
- Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice , 11 , 138 -142.
- Pennebaker, J. W., &amp; Francis, M. E. (1996). Cognitive, emotional, and language processes in disclosure. Cognition and Emotion , 10 , 601 -626.
- Pennebaker, J. W., Hughes, C. F., &amp; O'Heeron, R. C. (1987). The psychophysiology of confession: Linking inhibitory and psychosomatic processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 781 -793.

- Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J., &amp; Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 56 , 239 -245.
- Pennebaker, J. W., Mayne, T. J., &amp; Francis, M. E. (1997). Linguistic predictors of adaptive bereavement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 4 , 863 -871.
- Pert, C. B. (1997). Molecules of emotion: Why you feel the way you feel. New York: Scribner.
- Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., Pennebaker, J. W., Davison, K. P., &amp; Thomas, M. G. (1995). Disclosure of trauma and immune response to a hepatitis B vaccination program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 63 , 787 -792.
- Pulaski, M. (1999). Sex, power and rock 'n roll: An investigation of information processing and emotional views of liking for music videos. Thesis C66 1999 Doctoral dissertationStorrs, CT, USA: University of Connecticut. Dissertation Abstracts International.
- Renneker, R. (1981). Cancer and psychotherapy. In J. G. Goldberg (Ed.), Psychotherapeutic treatment of cancer patients . New York: Free Press.
- Ross, E. D., Homan, R. W., &amp; Buck, R. (1994). Differential hemispheric lateralization of primary and social emotions: Implications for developing a comprehensive neurology for emotions, repression, and the subconscious. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology , 7 , 1 -19.
- Russell, B. (1912). Problems of philosophy. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
- Sarason, I. G., Levine, H. M., Basham, R. B., &amp; Sarason, B. R. (1983). Assessing social support: The social support questionnaire. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 127 -139.
- Schachter, S., &amp; Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional state. Psychological Review , 69 , 379 -399.
- Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York: Macmillan.
- Sober, E., &amp; Wilson, D. S. (1998). Unto others. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
- Strizhakova, Y., Kang, Y., Ellis, D., Coman, E., Daigle, L., &amp; Buck, R. (2003). In Assessment of emotional uses and gratifications: Development of the EGrats scale . Paper presented at the meeting of the National Communication Association, Miami Beach, Fl .
- Tamietto, M., Castelli, L., Vighetti, S., Perozzo, P., Geminiani, G., Weiskrantz, L., et al. (2009). Unseen facial and bodily expressions trigger fast emotional reactions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 106 , 17661 -17666.
- Tomkins, S. S. (1962 -1963). Affect, imagery, and consciousness. (Vols.1 and 2). New York: Springer.
- Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology , 46 , 35 -57.
- Vaughn, R. (1980). How advertising works: A planning model. Journal of Advertising Research , 20 (5), 27 -33.
- Vaughn, R. (1986). How advertising works: A planning model revised. Journal of Advertising Research , 26 (1), 57 -66.
- Wagner, H., Buck, R., &amp; Winterbotham, M. (1993). Communication of specific emotions: Sending accuracy and communication measures. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior , 17 (1), 29 -53.
- Warner, R. M., Kenny, D. A., &amp; Stoto, M. (1979). A new round robin analysis of variance for social interaction data. Journal of Personality &amp; Social Psychology , 37 (10), 1742 -1757.
- Wilson, D. S., &amp; Sober, E. (1994). Reintroducing group selection to the human behavioral sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 17 , 585 -654.
- Young, P. T. (1961). Motivation and emotion. New York: Wiley.
- Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American Psychologist , 35 (2), 151 -175. https:/ /doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.35.2.151.
- Zajonc, R. B. (1984). On the primacy of affect. American Psychologist , 39 (2), 117 -123. https:/ / doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.39.2.117.

## FURTHER READING

- Buck, R. (1976). Human motivation and emotion. New York: Wiley.
- Buck, R. (1983). Emotional development and emotional education. In R. Plutchik &amp; H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion in early development (pp. 259 -292). New York: Academic Press.
- Buck, R. (1992). Epistemological fundamentals: Knowledge by acquaintance and spontaneous communication. Journal of Pragmatics , 17 , 447 -454.
- Buck, R. (2000). The epistemology of reason and affect. In J. Borod (Ed.), The neuropsychology of emotion . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Buck, R. (2002a). The genetics and biology of true love: Prosocial biological affects and the left hemisphere. Psychological Review , 109 , 739 -744.
- Buck, R. (2002b). 'Choice' and 'emotion' in altruism: Reflections of the morality of justice versus the morality of caring. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 25 , 254 -255.
- Buck, R. (2004). The gratitude of exchange and the gratitude of caring: A developmentalinteractionist perspective of moral emotion. In R. A. Emmons &amp; M. McCullough (Eds.), The psychology of gratitude (pp. 100 -122). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Buck, R., &amp; Davis, W. A. (2010). Marketing risk: Emotional appeals can promote the mindless acceptance of risk. In S. Roeser (Ed.), Vol. 5. Emotions and risky technologies (pp. 61 -80). New York: Springer.
- Cannon, W. B. (1932). The wisdom of the body. New York: W. W. Norton.
- Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Buck, R. (1992). In Advertising variables that predict consumer responses, in enhancing knowledge development in marketing . Proceedings of the 1992 summer marketing Educator's conference , Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association.
- Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Buck, R. (1993). The relationship of advertising variables to analytic and syncretic cognitions. In R. Varadarajan &amp; B. Jaworski (Eds.), Vol. 4. Marketing theory and applications (pp. 193 -198). Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association.
- Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Buck, R. (1994). Are advertisers using brain theory? Introducing the CASC scale. In C. W. Park &amp; D. Smith (Eds.), Vol. 5. Marketing theory and applications (pp. 161 -162). Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association.
- Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Buck, R. (1995). Media differences in rational and emotional responses to advertising. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media , 39 (1), 109 -125.
- Chaudhuri, A., &amp; Buck, R. (1997). Communication, cognition, and involvement: A theoretical framework for advertising. Journal of Marketing Communications , 3 (2), 111 -125.
- Christensen, A. J., Edwards, D. L., Wiebe, J. S., Benotsch, E. G., McKelvey, L., Andrews, M., et al. (1996). Effect of verbal self-disclosure on natural killer cell activity: Moderation influence on cynical hostility. Psychosomatic Medicine , 58 , 150 -155.
- Clore, G. L., &amp; Schnall, S. (2005). The influence of affect on attitude. In D. Albarracı ´n, B.T.Johnson,&amp;M.P.Zanna(Eds.), Handbookofattitudes (pp.437 -489). Mahwah:Erlbaum.
- Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist , 58 , 697 -720.
- Moon-Fanelli, A. (2011). The ontogeny of expression of communicative genes in coyotebeagle hybrids. Behavior Genetics , 41 , 858 -875.
- Pennebaker, J. W., &amp; Beall, S. K. (1986). Confronting a traumatic event: Toward an understanding of inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 95 , 274 -281.
- Pennebaker, J. W., Colder, M. A., &amp; Sharp, L. K. (1990). Accelerating the coping process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 , 528 -537.
- Woolpy, J. H., &amp; Ginsburg, B. E. (1967). Wolf socialization: A study of temperament in a wild social species. American Zoologist , 7 , 357 -363.