<!-- image -->

## Lacan's Theory of Desire and Its Practical Value

Wengqiu Wang (Corresponding author)

School of General Education

Sichuan International Studies University, Chongqing, China

E-mail: wangwenqiu@hotmail.com

Yupeng Jia College Translation and Interpreting Sichuan International Studies University, Chongqing, China E-mail: 1183728086a@gmail.com

Received: August 30, 2021      Accepted: September 23, 2021    Published: October 11, 2021

doi:10.5296/ijl.v13i5.18970                              URL: https://doi.org/10.5296/ijl.v13i5.18970

## Abstract

The word "desire" is one of the core terms in Lacan's psychoanalysis. As the famous saying of Lacan: "the desire of man is the desire of the Others", Lacan's theory of desire is based on Hegel - Koyev's theory of desire. By falsifying the subject, Lacan developed a unique theory of  desire,  that  is,  desire  is  the  alienated  subject,  the  fantasy  formed  in  the  pursuit  of  what Freud  called  the  Das  Ding  which  Lacan  called  the  Objet  petit  A,  and  finally  the  fantasy constructs desire retrospectively. The study of Lacan's theory of desire helps to provide more sections for the study of contemporary social phenomena and social development.

Keywords:

Desire, Objet petit A, Alienation

## 1. Alienation of Subject

Descartes' classic "I think, therefore I am" came out, marking the beginning of human reason to control the world. After the absorption and criticism of Kant and Hegel, the leading figures of  German  classical  philosophy,  the  subject  theory  gradually  became  the  core  category  of western  modern  philosophy.  However,  with  the  development  of  history,  the  subject  with self-awareness and self-consciousness has been gradually questioned by Philosophers such as Nietzsche, Husserl, and  Heidegger.  And  philosophical  schools such as structuralism, deconstruction, Western Marxism, phenomenology, and psychoanalysis have joined the list of subverting or transforming the subject (Chen Rongrong, 2020) And Lacan, just like rewriting

<!-- image -->

the  relationship  between  signifier  and  signified  in  Saussure,  rewrites  Descartes'  "I  think, therefore I am" into "I am thinking where I am not, therefore I am where I am not thinking", sending out a clear clarion call for the charge of subject theory.

Lacan points out that the subject has been transformed into a "false subject" after two brutal alienations, which is also called a divided subject, but the subject is unaware of its situation and thinks that it is still the original self. The subject of alienation began in the mirror stage for  the  first  time,  at  the  time  of  6  to  18  months,  babies,  themselves  is  in  a  state  of  cannot provide for themselves, also can't perceive the outside world, by chance, baby inadvertently exposed to a mirror, and their virtual image in the mirror produced great interest until ecstasy, he cheerfully dancing, look in the mirror-like dancing, Gradually he came to believe that the image in the mirror was himself. However, the baby in the mirror is only an imaginary image, and the baby has an imaginary identity to the image in the mirror but has given up the real self, which means that the subject has been on a road of despair since then, the false subject has  been  constructed,  and  the  real  subject  has  been  strangled.  As  the  baby  grows  up,  he gradually  understands  how  to  read  and  understand  the  world,  and  he  urgently  needs  to  be recognized by others to satisfy himself. Like Freud for the classic story of his little daughter eat strawberry cake, daughter likes to eat strawberry cake, because Freud's happy to see his daughter eat strawberry cakes, the little daughter sees she eats strawberry cake can let your father happy, so she fell in love with strawberry cake, but she doesn't know whether herself like to eat the cake or not. She took Freud's desires for her own. This also just confirms the famous  saying:  "The  desire  of  man  is  the  desire  of  others".  It  is  worth  noting  that  the alienation of the subject in this stage is at the level of the imagination. The subject sees the mirror image of himself from the perspective of others and identifies with it. It is a gaze in which the subject abandons his true self and forms an imaginary, false relationship

After the first alienation, the subject gradually transitions to the symbolic level. When does the subject enter the symbolic realm? Lacan gets answer from Freud. In "Beyond the Pleasure Principle," Freud once told an interesting story: children between the ages of 1 and 2, while their  mothers  were  out,  would  throw  the  spool  in  their  hands,  pull  it  back,  and  send  out Fort/Da) The voice. Freud found that this was a game often played by children when their mothers were absent, and believed that the whole game was a symbol of children's "absence and  presence"  of  their  mothers,  and  parodies  of  children's  coping  with  the  reality  of frustration. (Wu Qiong, 2011) Lacan called the scene described by Freud the initial moment when the subject enters the symbolic world. At this time, the meaning expressed by children's Fort/Da is not important, but the key is that Fort/Da, a linguistic act, has a symbolic function. Through this ritual of naming the missing thing, the child recreated the mother who was not present.  The  act  of  naming,  however,  can  be  said  to  be  a  metaphorical  substitution.  The Fort/Da presence of the child comes at the expense of the mother's absence, which is actually a  murder of the mother. The very existence of the mother is left behind, and the child can only summon that original loss through the naming ceremony of the mother. In Lacan's view, this is a trap set by the symbolic world or the greater other for the subject. Once entered into this symbolic order, the subject can only be forced to accept the slavery of the greater other. In the imaginary world, the subject constructs a false self by identifying with a virtual image

<!-- image -->

in  the  mirror,  but  that  is  not  the  real  subject,  it  is  only  an  imaginary  being.  To  obtain  the identity  of  the  subject,  the  subject  also  needs  to  identify  in  the  symbolic  world,  and  by accepting the order and law of the symbolic world, make himself recognized by the other. From the perspective of psychoanalysis, it means that the Oedipus complex of the subject is forbidden by the symbolic father. Only by confirming and accepting the ban of the "father" can the subject become a social existence, so the subject can only be a castrate subject forever. This is a kind of cruel alienation, "I want to study hard", "I want to be a great writer", "I am the pride of my parents", but "I" is unaware of it, "I" is only a symbol, constantly in the order of the language to accept the call. I am not myself ", the subject gradually accepts his symbol and  the  call  of  others,  becoming  the  re-alienation  of  alienation  above  nothing .  (Chen Rongrong, 2020)

## 2. The Generation of Desire

## 2.1 An Explanation of Lacan's Ternary Theory of Need-Demand-Desire

The subject has been falsified after two experiences of alienation, so the desire issued by the false  subject  is  not  the  real  desire  of  the  subject  itself,  which  leads  to  Lacan's  saying:  "the desire of man is the desire of the Others." However, in discussing desire, it is necessary to make a thorough distinction between the three concepts of need, demand, and desire, which Lacan also insists on. For Freud, desire is a kind of sexual drive, an extension of the libido, and  this  is,  of  course,  a  biological  statement,  which  Lacan  strongly  rejects,  because  in  his view,  if  the  desire  is  biological,  then  there  is  no  difference  between  humans  and  animals. Therefore,  he  proposed  the  ternary  relationship  of  need,  demand,  and  desire.  Of  the  three, necessity is physiological, a purely physiological instinct, one of the conditions of life. For example, when people are thirsty, they need to drink water, and when they are hungry, they need to eat.  Once this  need  is  satisfied,  there  will  be  a  reduction  of  the  need,  so  the  need belongs to specific substances. How does a need become a demand? Lacan, who has always had a special interest in babies, points out that when babies cry, needs become demands. A baby's  cry  caught  the  mother's  attention,  the  mother  trying  to  figure  out  what  babies  need, baby can't speak at this time, however, mothers have the most common way to comfort their baby  -  give  nipple  into  crying  babies  in  response  to  babies  need  in  the  mouth,  but  babies don't need it, instead, they may be sick, maybe need to mother's embrace, and so on, In short, as the other, the mother's needs for the baby do not correspond completely. The original needs of  the  baby  are  repressed,  and  the  intervention  of  language  and  the  other  makes  the  needs become  demands.  Finally,  there  is  desire.  Lacan  gives  a  mathematical  formula,  which  is desire = demand - need. He explains this: When needs are separated from wants, desires take shape at this margin .  (Lacan, 2001) Thus it can be concluded that, after the intervention of language, the purely physical needs are removed, and what is left must be something located in the symbolic order, that is, the unconditional love of the other. The other can provide the need of the subject, but it cannot provide the love he demands, because love itself is a lack. Now we can make a simple summary of this ternary relationship: In short, needs are animal appeals. Demands often appear metaphorically or metonymy, that is, when A is asked for, it actually  refers  to  B;  Desire  is  a  strong  lust  for  something,  that  is,  a  strong  desire  to  get something, but I do not know why I want i t (Zhao Chun, 2020).

<!-- image -->

## 2.2 Causes of Desire

Desire  is  born  out  of  demand,  but  the  question  remains  unresolved:  why  does  the  subject want desire? What drives the subject to pursue desire? Lacan called the cause of desire Objet petit A. Lacan called the object A his greatest discovery, claiming: "Marx invented surplus value. I found Objet petit A." This shows the position of the object a in Lacan's philosophical system. Lacan assumes that when the subject enters the symbolic world, to comply with the rules  of  the  symbolic  order,  the  subject  is  forced  to  give  up  his  love  and  leave  something outside the gate of the symbolic world. This unsymbolized material is the Objet petit A. In short,  the  Objet  petit  A  is  the  residual  product  of  the  failure  of  the  subject  in  the symbolization process, and it is an unspeakable mysterious object. In his book The Cultural Logic of Psychoanalysis, Zhao Chun gives a very pictorial example: Imagine a dark space where there is a strong light source. From this source, desire cast their light and shadow into the  darkness,  such  as  houses,  cars,  fame,  status,  etc.,  but  the  light  source  itself  is  always hidden in the depths of the darkness, can never be seen, we can only catch the shadow cast, but cannot catch the source. (Zhao Chun, 2020) The intense light source is the Objet petit A. Here, the author would like to use a famous saying of Saint Augustine about God: If God is ineffable,  according  to  this  argument,  God  cannot  be  called  ineffable,  because  when  he speaks this sentence, God has already been spoken . (Ellis John M, 1974). In the fable of the Fisherman and His Wife, the fisherman and his wife set free the flounder that had been the prince and kept demanding from him. The fisherman's wife asked for a beautiful house, but her desire has not been fulfilled, she asked for a palace, not enough for her, till the end when she asked to be the Pope, she still didn't feel satisfied. That is because she just captured the Objet petit A's projection on the wall of light, Objet petit A is not being captured, "it" (Objet petit A )changes a new direction, reflecting the light of the other, It draws the subject to the next desire, to infinity.

## 2.3 Desire and Fantasy

Lacan distinguishes desire and need from demand, which is the first identification of desire. The further determination of desire is in the field of Fantasy, where desire enters the room and begins to perform. Lacan gives a famous formula for Fantasy: $ ◇ a, read as the desire of the divided subject to the Objet petit A. Fantasy is not a desire, but a stage, or field, for the desire  and  the  elements  of  desire  to  present  themselves.  Žižek,  the  Slovenian  philosopher who read Lacan the best, pointed out that Fantasy tells us what we are to other people. (Žižek, 2006) That is meant to say, Fantasy is a field about the relationship between the subject and others.  In  this  field,  different  individuals  have  different  cultural  backgrounds  and  different experiential structures, but they are finally integrated into the Fantasy. So, what brings them together? The answer is desire.

"Fantasy, or ghostly configurations, are a response to the enigmatic question of 'che vuoi?'" Writes  Žižek  in  the Plague  of  Fantas y.  (Zhao  Chun,  2020)  "che  vuoi"  is  the  content  of Lacan's  desire  diagram  iii.  Without  further  elaboration  here,  we  only  need  to  know  one message from Žižek, that is, the subject in the Fantasy plans his own desires according to the desires of others. In the familiar example of Freud's little girl eats cake, the little girl wants to

www.macrothink.org/ijl

<!-- image -->

eat strawberry cake, but the core is not how to get the piece of strawberry cake t, but why the little girl wants to eat that piece of strawberry cake. How is desire transmitted to the young daughter? We now know that the young daughter plans and constructs her desires according to her parents' desires, and the place where the desires are constructed is in the fantasy. The young  daughter  sees  that  eating  the  strawberry  cake  can  make  her  parents  satisfied  and approve of her, so the fantasy of the young daughter eating the strawberry cake in front of Freud is constructed based on Freud's desire. Now, in this fantasy, the little girl becomes the object of  Freud's desire, and through the intermediary of the cake, the desire is exchanged between Freud and the little girl. Through the interaction of desires between subjects. Fantasy reveals to us what we really are to others.

Based on the above, we can say that the Fantasy provides the subject with the material from the other to construct the desire, and without the Fantasy, the desire would be exhausted, and the Fantasy also serves to maintain the desire. As we know, through Objet petit A and the Fantasy is the desire of  the  subject,  only  the  body  of  the  division  of  Objet  petit  A  leads  a desire, the body is not a complete body after two alienation, so the body will produce desire to force to give up something, and the desire for Objet petit A constitutes the Fantasy, thus forming a paradox: The desire formed by Fantasy is for the subject to chase the Objet petit A and return the subject to the perfection of the real world, but in order to maintain the endless flow of desire, the subject must remain divided, so as to chase the Objet petit A and form the desire. In this regard, Žižek explained that Fantasy, as a defense mechanism, is to prevent the subject from getting too close to the Objet petit A, which causes disastrous consequences. It acts as a barrier between the symbolic and the real, to prevent the subject from being crushed by the Real. Hence the saying: Desire itself is the resistance to desire(Žižek 2002)

## 2.4 Annihilation of Desire

The  fantasy  acts  as  a  barrier,  preventing  the  subject  from  truly  grasping  the  source  of  the desire, the Objet petit A. The Objet petit A must keep a certain distance from the subject so that  the  desire  can  operate  normally.  If  the  subject  catches  the  Objet  petit  A,  it  means  the annihilation of the desire. Here we can use Mary Shelley's classic novel Frankstein to explain the  annihilation  of  desire.  In  Frankstein,  the  protagonist  victor,  because  he  was  unable  to suppress the Oedipus complex, in his study, he was trying to resurrect the mother, by his own strength  at  this  time,  for  mother's  obsession  became  the  object  of  victor's  Objet  petit  A, driving the victor to complete his terrible invention, even amid a symbol of world ethics and legal norms, Victor still finished his invention. However, when his invention was completed, Victor  was  terrified: Ah! No one on earth could bear the horror of his image! Even if the mummy is resurrected, he is not so ferocious! ... I was in agony that night, and my pulse was so  swift  and  violent  that  at  times  it  seemed  every  vein  was  throbbing.  Sometimes  I  almost collapsed  from  exhaustion  and  exhaustion.  Mixed  with  the  horror  was  the  bitterness  of disappointment. The dream that had long been my source of nourishment and joy had now become my hell. How quickly that change comes! How thoroughly I was turned upside down! (Mary Shelley, 2018) through the victor itself by the desire to build fantasy, that should exist in  the  real  dead  mother.  However,  when  Victor  resurrects  his  "mother"  and  embraces  the Objet petit A, he did not get the imagined satisfaction, but panic, eventually the rest of his life

<!-- image -->

must bear the  guilt  and  shame  until  he  and  the  monster  he  created  die  together.  From  the perspective of psychoanalysis, the behavior logic of the novel is that the mother in the Real is reborn in the fantasy through the desire for the Objet petit A, while Victor insists on passing through  the  fantasy  and  giving  the  Objet  petit  A  a  directive  gaze.  Finally,  the  fantasy  is broken, the desire is annihilated, and everything disappears into air.

## 3. Realistic Value of Desire Theory

Lacan's theory of desire has a profound influence, and it can help us to think more deeply about the problems we encounter in the development of contemporary society. Some scholars once commented that today's society is a materialistic society, which has become a home of desire and a veritable vanity fair. In this vanity fair, the rapid expansion of desire, the original need is alienated into desire, and eventually makes people lost in the desire. Jean Baudrillard, the French master of postmodernism, deeply revealed the nature of this society, that is, the society  is  divided  into  a  consumer  society  and  a  symbol  society.  The  original  objects  are divided into two levels, one is the real existence representing the actual needs, and the other is the symbolic needs. Therefore, consumption in Marx's relations of production is alienated, people's  real  needs  are  covered  by  symbolic  needs,  and  some  are  endless  but  unsatisfied desires. In Baudrillard's view, in today's society, people pay more and more attention to the symbolic  value  of  objects,  while  the  functionality  of  objects  is  gradually  melting,  and  the process of symbolic consumption of objects represents the process of subjects chasing down the  differences  in  social  status.  As  Lacan  that  famous  words  say  "the  desire  of  man  is  the desire of the Others ", under the Other's words, the main body to obtain the recognition of the Other, will be desperate to Other, for example, a woman bought the latest Hermes handbag, because Hermes handbags mean gentry standard, this is essential for the woman who eagers to enter upper-class. Whether to enter society is determined by the Other, when the Hermes standard on the significance of the brand as the upper class gives in that bag, the woman has made  their  own  desire  of  material,  also  means  that  if  the  other  people  also  think  Hermes handbag is the  upper-class  standard,  the  woman  will  agree  with  this  view.  Moreover,  they regard  Hermes  handbags  as  their  object  of  desire.  Therefore,  woman's  consumption  of Hermes handbags is to pay for the symbolic value needed to enter the upper class, and such consumption of symbols makes the subject acquire a sense of existence. In this way, it can be said that the symbolic consumption of things contributes to the generation of desire, which drives the subject to pursue the false identification, as if the symbolic value of commodities is the value of their own existence.

In  a  consumer  society,  people  seek  differences  by  consuming  symbols  of  different  levels, build their own identity  and status in the society, and regard differentiated consumption as their  goal.  The  difference  is  fleeting,  however,  as  the  source  of  light  in  the  dark,  the differences  between  the  move  as  the  light  source,  also  in  constant  change,  like  constantly updated iPhone and various series cars, subject to obtain difference disappeared soon after in innovation, to get the difference, consumption also unavoidable, Only through consumption can  we  obtain  a  real  sense  of  existence  and  peace,  and  this  constant  self-consumption eventually makes the subject completely lost in the self-created consumption desire trap, and makes the whole society fall into a pathological consumption cycle. It can be concluded that

<!-- image -->

the  alienation  of  consumption  dissolves  the  real  need  and  generates  the  desire,  while  the constant pursuit of difference makes the subject become the slave of the desire of the other, which is driven and unable to extricate itself.

## 4. Conclusion

Ever since  Lacan's  theory  of  desire  was  born,  critics  have  criticized  it  as  historicism;  The supremacy of  the  signifier  is  too  absolute;  An  excessive  belief  in  nothingness,  and  so  on. However, it has to be said that Lacan's theory of desire has well explained a series of social phenomena.  As  society's  obsession  and  superstition  with  certain  brands  have  reached  the point  where  people  don't  buy  them,  we  can  deeply  realize  that  social  desire  is  rapidly expanding. However, Lacan's theory of desire undoubtedly gives us a blow of wakefulness, which  makes  us  keep  sober  cognition  and  vigilance  of  our  desires,  and  keep  in  mind  the control  and  balance  of  our  desires,  to  realize  self-liberation  and  all-round  development  of human beings.

## References

Chen,  R.-R.  (2020).  The  analysis  of  Lacan's  desire  theory  and  the  contemporary  value. Journal of Chongqing University of Technology (Social Science), 149-155

Ellis, J. M. (1974). The theory of literary criticism . University of California Press.

Lacan. (2001). Ecrits . Routledge: Great Britain, p. 156.

Shelley, M. (1960). Frankstein . New York: Dent &amp; Dutton, pp. 65-68.

Wu, Q. (2011) Jacques Lacan: Read your symptoms . China Renmin University Press, p. 62.

Zhao, C. (2020). Cultural logic of psychoanalysis. Science Press, pp. 38-39.

ŽižekSlavoj.  (2002). The  Sublime  Object  of  Ideology .  Central  Compilation  &amp;  Translation Press, p. 24.

ŽižekSlavoj. (2006). How to read Lacan. London: Granta, p. 89.

## Copyrights

Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.

This  is  an  open-access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

www.macrothink.org/ijl