<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Journal of Vocational Behavior

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jvb

## Motivation pro /uniFB01 les at work: A self-determination theory approach

Joshua Howard a, ⁎ , Marylène Gagné a , Alexandre J.S. Morin b , Anja Van den Broeck c,d

- a University of Western, Australia
- b Institute for Positive Psychology and Education, Australian Catholic University, Australia
- c KU Leuven, Belgium
- d North-West University, South Africa

## a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Received 24 February 2016 Received in revised form 12 July 2016 Accepted 14 July 2016 Available online 16 July 2016

Keywords: Motivation Self-determination theory Pro /uniFB01 les Latent pro /uniFB01 le analysis

Continuum

## a b s t r a c t

Self-determination theory proposes that individuals experience distinct types of motivation to varying degrees. While it is well documented that these types of motivation differentially predict outcomes, very little attention has been paid to how they interact within individuals. The current study addresses the simultaneous occurrence of multiple motivation types within individual workers by adopting a person-centered approach on two samples of employees from different countries ( n = 723 &amp; 286). Four very similar motivation pro /uniFB01 les were found across samples, representing balanced motivation, amotivated, autonomously regulated and highly motivated employees. In Sample 1, governmental employees presented a greater likelihood of membership in the least desirable amotivated pro /uniFB01 le. In Sample 2, autonomously and highly motivated pro /uniFB01 les showed superior work performance and higher levels of wellbeing, while the amotivated pro /uniFB01 le fared the worst. The presence of external regulation in a pro /uniFB01 le appears unimportant when combined with autonomous forms of motivation, and detrimental to outcomes in the absence of autonomous forms of motivation. These results support the hypothesis that autonomous forms of motivation are far more important in promoting positive workplace outcomes than more controlling forms.

© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Motivation, generally de /uniFB01 ned as the energy, direction and persistence of behavior (Pinder, 1998), is an inherently complex concept as evidenced by the variety of approaches to its conceptualization and measurement. Self-determination theory (SDT; Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985) offers a well-supported conceptualization which proposes that motivation is best represented by conceptually distinct, yet complementary, types of behavioral regulations experienced by individuals to varying degrees. While it is now well documented that these types of regulation differentially predict outcomes (e.g., Koestner &amp; Losier, 2002), very little attention has been paid to how they interact within individuals. The current study addresses the simultaneous occurrence of multiple behavioral regulations within individual workers by adopting a person-centered approach to work motivation. While variable-centered analyses, which have dominated the /uniFB01 eld so far, have been extremely useful in their own right, the complexity of interactions between numerous types of motivation cannot easily be examined using traditional regression techniques, which become almost impossible to interpret when more than three interacting variables are simultaneously considered. No such limit exists when person-centered analyses are used to assess how con /uniFB01 gurations of motivation factors are organized within individuals.

⁎ Corresponding author at: School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, 6009, WA, Australia. E-mail address: joshua.howard@uwa.edu.au (J. Howard).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

This shift to a person-centered strategy is more than just a shift in methods. It involves a fundamentally different way of thinking about motivation which may affect the design of interventions (Zyphur, 2009). When conceptualizing types of motivation as variables, we are not thinking about a whole person, but about one of the many components that make up a person's motivational pro /uniFB01 le. Resulting interventions are designed to increase one type of motivation (e.g., intrinsic) without taking into consideration how the intervention will impact the other types of motivation (e.g., extrinsic). Such an omission may well make interventions less effective. In contrast, the person-centered approach takes into account the interplay between a person's motives, and consequently may lead to interventions aiming to in /uniFB02 uence the person's whole motivational pro /uniFB01 le. This is likely to produce better tailored and cost ef /uniFB01 cient interventions for particular subpopulations of employees (Morin &amp; Marsh, 2015). In practice, this approach would make SDT more compatible with how people in positions of authority, such as managers, actually think about the motivation of their employees (Morin, Morizot, Boudrias, &amp; Madore, 2011; Zyphur, 2009).

As reviewed below, a few attempts have been made to conceptualize work motivation pro /uniFB01 les. The present study, however, does so more comprehensively by: (a) including all types of regulation proposed by SDT (unlike Van den Broeck, Lens, De Witte, &amp; Van Coillie, 2013), (b) using two large heterogeneous samples of workers from two countries (unlike Graves, Cullen, Lester, Ruderman, &amp; Gentry, 2015) and, (c) utilizing the latest advances in latent pro /uniFB01 le analysis (unlike Moran, Diefendorff, Kim, &amp; Liu, 2012 and Van den Broeck et al., 2013). As such it represents an incremental advancement in this area of research and potentially provides a more accurate representation of the types of pro /uniFB01 les that are likely to be found in the work domain. Furthermore, it extends previous research by demonstrating how the relative frequency of the pro /uniFB01 les differs across job categories (white collar, blue collar, governmental), and the relation between the pro /uniFB01 les and a variety of outcomes, including in-role and extra-role performance, engagement, burnout, and job satisfaction.

## 1. Self-determination theory

SDT conceptualizes motivation as multiple distinguishable facets, each representing a different form of behavioral regulation, and assumed to follow a continuum of self-determination (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985; Gagné &amp; Deci, 2005). At one extreme, intrinsic motivation occurs when an individual participates in an activity for the enjoyment inherent in the activity itself, while at the other extreme extrinsic motivation occurs when behaviors are enacted for an instrumental reason. SDT proposes that extrinsic motivation can be internalized to become autonomously regulated. Identi /uniFB01 ed regulation, an internalized form of extrinsic motivation, occurs when an individual elects to act because the behavior or the outcome of the behavior is of personal signi /uniFB01 cance. Identi /uniFB01 ed regulation and intrinsic motivation, are autonomous forms of motivation, while the next two regulations are controlled forms of motivation. Introjected regulation, an internalized yet controlled form of extrinsic motivation, occurs when behaviors are undertaken in order to avoid negative self-feelings such as shame, or to attain positive self-feelings such as pride. External regulation, a non-internalized form of extrinsic motivation lying at the lower end of the continuum, occurs when behaviors are undertaken for externally derived rewards or punishments. The most current conceptualization of workplace motivation suggests that external regulation is best described through two components, external-social, and external-material (Gagné et al., 2015). External-social regulation is characterized by the desire to gain approval or respect from others, or to avoid criticism, whereas external-material regulation focuses on material rewards, and the avoidance of losing one's job.

Finally, amotivation is the absence of any desire to exert effort. Amotivation has been de /uniFB01 ned as a state in which individuals do not associate a behavior with subsequent outcomes, and as such, behaviors are executed for reasons unknown or not executed at all (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985). Accordingly, amotivated individuals are likely to feel detached from their actions, or may feel a lack of control over their present situation or behavior, and will therefore invest little time or energy towards such behaviors. This state was shown to be associated with a wide range of negative workplace outcomes including lower vitality, job satisfaction, affective commitment, adaptivity, proactivity, and job effort, as well as greater emotional exhaustion, burnout, and turnover intention (Gagné et al., 2015; Tremblay, Blanchard, Taylor, Pelletier, &amp; Villeneuve, 2009). Thus, given that people are still enacting work behaviors despite their lack of motivation, and considering the notable negative consequences associated with amotivated behavior, it is our contention that amotivation is an important feature of the self-determination continuum to consider.

In addition to the empirical evidence demonstrating the negative in /uniFB02 uence of amotivation on performance and wellbeing, on a more theoretical point, a complete depiction of the continuum of motivation should not only include a variety of motives for engaging in speci /uniFB01 c behaviors (ranging from the intrinsic pleasure to external constraints) but also the complete lack of motive to engage in these behaviors (which forms the opposite pole of the self-determination continuum). This representation of the SDT continuum has been recently supported in the work area by a recent study by Howard, Gagné, Morin, and Forest (2016), in which it was found that amotivation is located along the same continuum as the behavioral regulations, with no evidence of discontinuity.

While there is ongoing debate concerning the presence of this continuum beyond a mere heuristic tool (Chemolli &amp; Gagné, 2014), this research will examine whether the pattern of regulations expected from this continuum hypothesis is present in employee pro /uniFB01 les. Speci /uniFB01 cally, support for the continuum hypothesis would be demonstrated if pro /uniFB01 les follow a smooth increase/decrease in the level of the different regulations as a function of their position on the continuum. Alternatively, weak support would be found through the presence of pro /uniFB01 les in which people experience similar levels of regulations assumed to be located at opposite poles of the continuum (e.g., intrinsic and external regulations; Grolnick &amp; Ryan, 1987).

So far, substantial research has examined how these regulations relate to various antecedents and outcomes. Results generally demonstrate that intrinsic motivation and identi /uniFB01 ed regulation yield more positive outcomes, such as productivity and retention, than introjected and external regulations (Gagné, 2014; Gagné &amp; Deci, 2005), though some research has found differences in the

effects of intrinsic versus identi /uniFB01 ed regulation, and in the effects of introjected versus external regulation (Gagné et al., 2015; Koestner &amp; Losier, 2002). This approach does not take into account the multidimensional nature of motivation, and the fact that workers may simultaneously endorse multiple reasons for doing their job. Moreover, this research does not shed light on how distinct motivational regulations interact in predicting outcomes. What happens when employees are motivated for both autonomous and controlled reasons, compared to employees who are only motivated for autonomous reasons? For instance, is it more important to have a high level of overall motivation or is the proportion of autonomous to controlled motivation more in/uniFB02 uential? How do amotivated employees compare to employees presenting controlled motivation? How combinations of speci /uniFB01 c regulations relate to key outcomes also remains unknown, and essentially unexplored because of the heavy reliance on variablecentered methods. Indeed, the complexity of interactions required to fully describe motivation (i.e., involving six interacting types of motivation) calls for the adoption of a person-centered approach. In response, the aims of this study are to establish which motivational pro /uniFB01 les are most likely to emerge in the work domain and to examine predictors and outcomes of pro /uniFB01 le membership.

## 2. Motivational pro /uniFB01 les

Few studies have applied a person-centered approach to motivation research across domains (education, sport, work, etc.). Most have used cluster analysis, a method which has been criticized (e.g., Meyer &amp; Morin, 2016; Morin, Maïano, Nagengast, Marsh, Morizot &amp; Janosz, 2011; Vermunt &amp; Magidson, 2002) as being too sensitive to the clustering algorithm and measurement scales, as lacking clear guidelines for the selection of an optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les, and as relying on rigid assumptions that do not always hold with real-life data (i.e., exact assignment of employees to a single pro /uniFB01 le, conditional independence, equality of the indicators' variances across clusters). Furthermore, cluster analytic studies have often relied on small samples of dubious generalizability (Boiché, Sarrazin, Grouzet, Pelletier, &amp; Chanal, 2008; Gillet, Berjot, &amp; Paty, 2009; Gillet, Berjot, Vallerand, Amoura, &amp; Rosnet, 2012; Gillet, Vallerand, &amp; Paty, 2013; Gillet, Vallerand, &amp; Rosnet, 2009; McNeill &amp; Wang, 2005).

Motivational pro /uniFB01 ling has also largely been limited by the dichotomization of motivation into the broad categories of autonomous and controlled regulations. This dichotomization is a commonly used practice that simpli /uniFB01 es the pro /uniFB01 les and makes them easier to estimate, but that also reduces the richness of potential /uniFB01 ndings and may hide potentially important con /uniFB01 gurations. Nonetheless, among studies using this dichotomization in the educational domain, the observed pro /uniFB01 les of academic motivation have been relatively well replicated, and generally revealed pro /uniFB01 les characterized by high autonomous/low controlled motivation (HA/LC), high autonomous/high controlled motivation (HA/HC), low autonomous/high controlled motivation (LA/ HC), and low autonomous/low controlled motivation (LA/LC; Hayenga &amp; Corpus, 2010; Liu, Wang, Tan, Koh, &amp; Ee, 2009; Ratelle, Guay, Vallerand, Larose, &amp; Senécal, 2007; Vansteenkiste, Sierens, Soenens, Luyck, &amp; Lens, 2009). Results from the sport domain often replicate these pro /uniFB01 les with slight variations (e.g. HA/HC, Moderate Autonomy/LC, HA/MC, MA/HC; Gillet, Vallerand, &amp; Rosnet, 2009; Gillet et al., 2013).

Given the heavy reliance on /uniFB01 nancial compensation in the work domain, motivational pro /uniFB01 les are likely to differ from those identi /uniFB01 ed in the educational and sport domains, especially when focusing on a more comprehensive coverage of all types of regulations. This particularity of the work domain makes it important to look at external and introjected regulations as separate constructs. To our knowledge, only three studies have examined motivational pro /uniFB01 les at work (Graves et al., 2015; Moran, Diefendorff, Kim, &amp; Liu, 2012; Van den Broeck et al., 2013). Van den Broeck et al. (2013) applied cluster analysis to three samples of employees, collapsing the regulations into a controlled-autonomous dichotomy, leading to the identi /uniFB01 cation of the same set of four pro /uniFB01 les identi /uniFB01 ed in the education and sport area. In contrast, Moran et al. (2012) applied cluster analysis to the full range of behavioral regulations. Through this more complete representation, these authors identi /uniFB01 ed /uniFB01 ve clusters, most of which differed from those identi /uniFB01 ed in the education and sport domain: one presenting moderate levels of motivation across regulation types, one presenting high levels of motivation across regulation types (corresponding to the HA/HC pro /uniFB01 le), one representing low levels of autonomy (low levels of identi /uniFB01 ed and intrinsic motivation) and moderate levels on the other forms of regulation, one presenting a more self-determined pro /uniFB01 le (high on introjected, identi /uniFB01 ed and intrinsic motivation), and one presenting moderate levels on most regulations except for a low level of introjection. Finally, Graves et al. (2015) identi /uniFB01 ed six latent pro /uniFB01 les in a small sample of managers. These pro /uniFB01 les presented similar con /uniFB01 gurations of motivation (i.e., highest on intrinsic and identi /uniFB01 ed regulation, followed by introjected, and lowest on external regulation) but different overall levels, so that one was higher on autonomous than controlled forms of motivation, while another was low on all forms of regulations. However, this study relied on a relatively small sample of managers, and provided insuf /uniFB01 cient information regarding model speci /uniFB01 cation to allow other researchers to replicate their results or to objectively assess the adequacy of the analyses.

This relative lack of research in the work domain, the dichotomization of regulations into controlled or autonomous categories, and the reliance on cluster analyses performed on small samples clearly represent signi /uniFB01 cant limitations of research in this area. In contrast, the present study applied latent pro /uniFB01 le analyses (LPA) to the full range of behavioral regulations as they occur in a work context using large heterogeneous samples of employees from two countries (Canada and Belgium) in order to derive a common set of work motivation pro /uniFB01 les. Employees completed the recently validated Multidimensional Work Motivation Scale (Gagné et al., 2015), which has been shown to have several advantageous features (e.g., improved psychometric properties, greater content coverage in terms of motivation types) compared to traditional measures of work motivation (e.g., Gagné et al., 2010).

In contrast to cluster analyses, LPA is a far more /uniFB02 exible model-based approach to classi /uniFB01 cation (Muthén, 2002). Being modelbased, LPA allows for the estimation of alternative models in which the restrictive assumptions of cluster analyses can be relaxed. Importantly, LPA aims to /uniFB01 nd the smallest number of pro /uniFB01 les that can describe associations among a set of continuous variables, relying on a formal set of objective criteria to guide the identi /uniFB01 cation of the optimal number of latent pro /uniFB01 les in the data. These

pro /uniFB01 les are called latent because they are prototypical in nature, which means that rather than forcing each employee to correspond to a single pro /uniFB01 le, all participants are allocated a probability of membership in all pro /uniFB01 les based on their degree of similarity with each prototypical latent pro /uniFB01 le.

Due to the scarcity of research on motivational pro /uniFB01 les in the work domain, especially of studies considering the full array of motivation types, it is dif /uniFB01 cult to specify hypotheses about the nature and number of expected pro /uniFB01 les. Given that previous research has typically found four to six pro /uniFB01 les, it was expected that a relatively small number of pro /uniFB01 les (4 -6) would be identi /uniFB01 ed, and would represent not only different levels of overall motivation, but also different shapes, re /uniFB02 ecting distinct combinations of regulation types. Based on previous research, it was also anticipated that a pro /uniFB01 le dominated by autonomous forms of regulation, a pro /uniFB01 le dominated by controlled forms of regulation, and at least one pro /uniFB01 le containing both autonomous and controlled forms of regulation would be identi /uniFB01 ed. While the emergence of different pro /uniFB01 les remains possible, in particular across the two samples considered here, the current study aimed to introduce a broad typology of meaningful pro /uniFB01 les common to most workplaces. However, latent pro /uniFB01 le analyses suffer from the same limitations as variable-centered analyses in terms of generalizability and in providing a meaningful representation of the data (i.e., construct validity). In particular it has been previously argued that the only way to really support a substantive interpretation of latent pro /uniFB01 les is to embark on a process of construct validation to demonstrate that the identi /uniFB01 ed pro /uniFB01 les either meaningfully relate to covariates (predictors, or outcomes), or can reliably be replicated across samples (Marsh, Lüdtke, Trautwein, &amp; Morin, 2009; Morin, Morizot, Boudrias &amp; Madore, 2011; Muthén, 2003). To address this issue, we tested whether the identi /uniFB01 ed set of pro /uniFB01 les generalized across two Western countries. Furthermore, we assessed the extent to which these pro /uniFB01 les were related to a series of predictors and outcomes to which we now turn our attention.

## 3. Predictors of motivation pro /uniFB01 les

To date little research has examined determinants of employees' motivation pro /uniFB01 les. Among this limited research, Moran et al. (2012) showed that membership into more autonomously motivated pro /uniFB01 les could be predicted by greater levels of satisfaction of the needs for competence, autonomy, and relatedness, while Graves et al. (2015) showed that members of the more autonomously motivated pro /uniFB01 les tended to occupy hierarchically higher positions and to report receiving higher levels of supervisor support. These results are consistent with SDT, which proposes that the satisfaction of these needs and exposure to work-related context that support their satisfaction, are key determinants of autonomous motivation (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985; Gagné &amp; Deci, 2005). As such, it is also to be expected that job categories allowing for greater levels of need satisfaction may result in a greater proportion of employees corresponding to predominantly autonomously-driven pro /uniFB01 les (i.e., higher in intrinsic motivation and identi /uniFB01 ed regulation). In particular, research shows that workplace characteristics that in /uniFB02 uence need satisfaction, such as job design, participative leadership, and organic (vs. bureaucratic) structures, tend to be associated with signi /uniFB01 cantly higher levels of autonomous motivation (De Cooman, Stynen, Van den Broeck, Sels, &amp; De Witte, 2013; Gillet, Gagné, Sauvagère, &amp; Fouquereau, 2012). By this reasoning, it was expected that manufacturing and other blue-collar industries often characterized by less skill variety, autonomy, more directive leadership, and hourly wages, would be less likely to satisfy these needs. For this reason, we expected motivational pro /uniFB01 les characterized by lower levels of autonomous motivation and higher levels of controlled motivation to be more frequent among employees working in these sectors. In contrast, white-collar employees from the technology sector should be more likely to experience task variety and participative leadership, which would likely facilitate need satisfaction (Blais, Brière, Lachance, Riddle, &amp; Vallerand, 1993; Gagné, Senécal, &amp; Koestner, 1997; Gagné et al., 2010). Thus, we expected motivational pro /uniFB01 les characterized by higher levels of autonomous motivation and lower levels of controlled motivation to be more frequent among these employees. Finally, white-collar governmental employees should be more likely to experience highly bureaucratic job structures, which may sti /uniFB02 e motivation, making it more likely for these employees to correspond to pro /uniFB01 les characterized by lower levels of both autonomous and controlled motivation. This study incorporated blue-collar manufacturing, white-collar technological, and white-collar governmental job categories as predictors of pro /uniFB01 le membership to test these hypotheses.

## 4. Consequences of motivation pro /uniFB01 les

Past research has found that pro /uniFB01 les characterized by high levels of autonomous motivation seem to yield better performance outcomes. However, it is less clear how controlled types of motivation relate to performance. So far, most research conducted regarding the outcomes of motivational pro /uniFB01 les have been conducted in the educational area. This research has shown that the HA/ LC pro /uniFB01 le tends to be associated with higher levels of academic achievement, as well as lower levels of procrastination, openness to cheating, and school dropout than the HA/HC pro /uniFB01 le (Hayenga &amp; Corpus, 2010; Ratelle et al., 2007; Vansteenkiste et al., 2009). In contrast, the LA/LC and LA/HC pro /uniFB01 les both yielded lower levels of academic achievement and higher levels of procrastination, but did not differ from one another, indicating that the presence of controlled motivation had negligible effects on performance (Vansteenkiste et al., 2009). However, additional results suggested that controlled motivation may actually detract from optimal performance, measured by grade point average and self-perceived skill acquisition, even when autonomous motivation is also present (Hayenga &amp; Corpus, 2010; Liu et al., 2009). It thus appears that pro /uniFB01 le composition, or the ratio of autonomous to controlled motivation, may represent a stronger predictor of performance outcomes than the simple overall ' quantity ' of motivation that characterizes a speci /uniFB01 c pro /uniFB01 le.

However, in the work domain, researchers have theorized that some levels of introjected and external regulation may prove bene /uniFB01 cial in predicting positive outcomes (Boiché et al., 2008; Moran et al., 2012; Van den Broeck et al., 2013). A meta-analysis

also found that while intrinsic motivation was more strongly related to the quality of the work completed, external regulation was more strongly associated with the quantity of work completed (Cerasoli, Nicklin, &amp; Ford, 2014). Likewise, work pressure, theorized to foster external regulation, was positively related to the quantity of work effort and engagement (De Cooman et al., 2013; Van den Broeck, De Cuyper, De Witte, &amp; Vansteenkiste, 2010). The one pro /uniFB01 le study in the work domain that has examined performance showed that the HA/LC and HA/HC pro /uniFB01 les yielded comparable levels of self-reported in-role performance, and higher levels than those observed in the LA/HC and LA/LC pro /uniFB01 les (Moran et al., 2012).

As suggested above, the quality and quantity of performance may be promoted through different motivational pro /uniFB01 les (Cerasoli et al., 2014). Similarly, required (in-role) and discretionary (extra-role) performance may also be differentially affected by motivational pro /uniFB01 les (Gagné et al., 2015). For instance, we might expect that pro /uniFB01 les characterized by high levels of autonomous types of motivation would yield greater levels of in-role and extra-role performance, while pro /uniFB01 les presenting high levels of controlled types of motivation would only yield greater levels of in-role performance. The question is whether controlled types of motivation will sti /uniFB02 e extra-role performance, as has been suggested in some variable-centered research (Battistelli, Galletta, Portoghese, &amp; Vandenberghe, 2013).

Past research also found that pro /uniFB01 les characterized by high levels of autonomous motivation yield better wellbeing outcomes (Van den Broeck et al., 2013). In this situation, unlike what is observed in the prediction of performance, controlled motivation does not seem to have any advantage in promoting wellbeing -it even seems to decrease it. In the educational domain, the HA/LC pro /uniFB01 le was found to be associated with lower levels of school-related anxiety than the HA/HC pro /uniFB01 le, while the LA/LC and LA/HC pro /uniFB01 les were associated with the highest levels of school anxiety (Vansteenkiste et al., 2009). In the work domain, Van den Broeck et al. (2013) and Graves et al. (2015) both found that HA/HC and HA/LC pro /uniFB01 les reported the greatest (and equal) levels of job satisfaction. However, strain was lower in the HA/LC than in the HA/HC pro /uniFB01 le; followed by the LA/LC pro /uniFB01 le. Employees from the LA/HC pro /uniFB01 le reported the highest levels of work-related strain. The present study expands on these studies by the inclusion of work engagement (vigor, dedication, and absorption; Schaufeli &amp; Bakker, 2003) and burnout (emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and personal inef /uniFB01 cacy; Maslach, Schaufeli, &amp; Leiter, 2001) as potential outcomes of employees' motivational pro /uniFB01 les.

## 5. Method

## 5.1. Participants and procedure

This study incorporated two samples of data collected between 2008 and 2013. Sample 1 consisted of 723 Canadian employees recruited within three different industry sectors: 105 from the technological sector, 319 from the government sector and 299 from the manufacturing sector (Meanage = 44.30; female = 15.8% [54.1% gender info missing]). The subsample of 105 white collar technology sector employees was previously used in the MMWS validation study (Gagné et al., 2015). These employees completed surveys containing the original English ( n =178) or French ( n =545) versions of the MWMS. Sample 2 consisted of 286 Belgian employees (Meanage = 41.66 years; female = 57.7%; MeanTenure =9.39 years) who completed Dutch versions of the outcome measures, in addition to the Dutch MWMS. In both countries, a variety of organizations were approached with the possibility to participate in this study of work motivation. These organizations were selected mainly through a process of convenience based on lead investigators' contacts and proximity. Employees from the organization who agreed to participate had the possibility to complete con /uniFB01 dential surveys on an online platform or in paper format on their work premises. Participation was voluntary.

## 5.2. Measures

A variable specifying job category (e.g., blue collar manufacturing, white collar technology, white collar governmental) was available only for Sample 1 ( n =723) and was subsequently dummy-coded in two complementary variables to re /uniFB02 ect white collar technology sector employees (1; n = 105) versus others (0) and governmental employees (1; n = 319) versus others (0).

The MWMS (Gagné et al., 2015) includes 19 items assessing six distinct motivation types. Each item is an answer to the question ' Why do you or would you put effort into your current job? ' along a 1 (not at all) to 7 (completely) point Likert scale. Sample items include, ' I don't know why I'm doing this job, it's pointless work ' (Amotivation; Cronbach's α =0.74 &amp; 0.87 in Samples 1 and 2 respectively), ' Because others will reward me /uniFB01 nancially only if I put enough effort in my job (e.g., employer, supervisor … ) ' (External regulation material; α = 0.60 &amp; 0.70), ' To get others' approval (e.g., supervisor, colleagues, family, clients … ) ' (External regulation social; α = 0.78 &amp; 0.76), ' Because otherwise I will feel ashamed of myself ' (Introjected regulation; α = 0.69 &amp; 0.71), ' Because putting efforts in this job aligns with my personal values ' (Identi /uniFB01 ed regulation; α = 0.78 &amp; 0.67), and ' Because the work I do is interesting ' (Intrinsic motivation; α =0.90 &amp; 0.88). Validation evidence for the MWMS has demonstrated a good /uniFB01 t for a six-factor structure, equivalence of the underlying measurement model across the English, French and Dutch linguistic versions used in the present study, acceptable scale score reliability ( α from 0.70 to 0.90 for all subscales), and supported the convergent and discriminant validity of scales (Gagné et al., 2015).

The outcomes variables were available only in Sample 2. In-role performance was measured by seven self-reported items taken from Abramis (1994). Items were rated on a 1 (really bad) to 5 (really good) Likert scale with each item based on the question stem of, ' In the last (seven days/week you worked), how well were you …' Items included, ' doing your best work, ' and ' showing initiative in your work ' ( α = 0.85). Extra-role performance was measured by 9 items from Morrison (1994), with

each item rated 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree) along a Likert scale ( α =0.81; e.g., ' I help in the training of new colleagues ' and ' I take active part in meetings of the organization ' ). Job satisfaction was measured through 14 items taken from De Witte, Hooge, Vandoorne, and Glorieux (2001). Items were rated on a 5-point scale (1, totally dissatis /uniFB01 ed to 5, totally satis /uniFB01 ed) in response to questions such as, ' How satis /uniFB01 ed are you in general with your work? ' ( α =0.89). Engagement was measured using 15 items from the Utrech Work Engagement Scale (UWES, Schaufeli &amp; Bakker, 2003) on a 1 (very rarely) to 6 (always) Likert scale. Subscales for vigor (5 items, e.g., ' When I get up in the morning, I feel like going to work ' ), dedication (5 items, e.g., ' I am enthusiastic about my job ' ), absorption (5 items, e.g., ' When I am working, I forget everything else around me ' ) were combined into an overall measure of work engagement for the sake of parsimony ( α =0.95). Finally, burnout was measured on a 6-point scale using the Schaufeli and van Dierendonck (1993) adaptation of the Maslach Burnout Inventory. Two subscales of emotional exhaustion (5 items; e.g., ' working all day is a heavy burden for me ' ) and cynicism (4 items; e.g., ' I doubt the usefulness of my work ' ) were included and combined in the current analyses ( α =0.93), and scored from 1 (very rarely) to 6 (always).

## 6. Analyses

## 6.1. Preliminary measurement models

Preliminary measurement models were estimated in both samples using the robust maximum likelihood estimator (MLR) available in Mplus 7.3 (Muthén &amp; Muthén, 1998-2015), in conjunction with Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) estimation to deal with the very low level of missing data present in this data set (0% to 2.8% per item; M = 1.1%). In each sample, we contrasted a classical con /uniFB01 rmatory factor analytic (CFA) model, in which each of the six MWMS factors was de /uniFB01 ned on the basis of it's a priori items, with no cross-loading allowed between items and non-target factors, with an exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM; Asparouhov &amp; Muthén, 2009; Morin, Marsh, &amp; Nagengast, 2013), which was de /uniFB01 ned in the same manner as the CFA model while allowing for the free estimation of cross-loadings between items and non-target factors. These ESEM models were speci /uniFB01 ed using a con /uniFB01 rmatory approach using target rotation (Asparouhov &amp; Muthén, 2009), which allows for the pre-speci /uniFB01 cation of target loadings in a con /uniFB01 rmatory manner, while cross-loadings are targeted to be as close to zero as possible. Recent studies conducted on motivational data show the advantages of using an ESEM measurement model (Guay, Morin, Litalien, Valois, &amp; Vallerand, 2015; Litalien, Guay, &amp; Morin, 2015) in terms of obtaining reduced estimates of factor correlations more in line with theoretical expectations. This decision is also based on the results from simulation studies (Asparouhov &amp; Muthén, 2009; Sass &amp; Schmitt, 2010; Schmitt &amp; Sass, 2011) and studies of simulated data (Marsh, Lüdtke, Nagengast, Morin, &amp; Von Davier, 2013; Morin, Arens, &amp; Marsh, 2015) showing that forcing cross-loadings (even as small as 0.100, Marsh et al., 2013) present in the population model to be exactly zero (as in CFA) forces these cross-loadings to be absorbed through an in /uniFB02 ation of the factor correlations. In contrast, these same studies show that the free estimation of cross-loadings, even when none are present in the population model, still provides unbiased estimates of the factor correlations (also see Asparouhov, Muthén, &amp; Morin, 2015; Morin, Arens &amp; Marsh, 2015). Thus, Asparouhov et al. (2015, p. 1564) note that:

' Overall, these studies clearly show that the inclusion of cross-loadings is neither logically /uniFB02 awed nor logically incorrect but rather empirically supported by statistical research. Going back to the /uniFB02 awed argument that cross-loadings ' taint ' the nature of the constructs, these results rather show that it is the exclusion of these cross-loadings that modi /uniFB01 es the meaning of the constructs . '

Given the known oversensitivity of the chi-square test of exact /uniFB01 t ( χ 2 ) to sample size and minor model misspeci /uniFB01 cations (e.g., Marsh, Hau, &amp; Grayson, 2005), we relied on goodness-of/uniFB01 t indices to describe the /uniFB01 t of these models (Hu &amp; Bentler, 1999): (a) the comparative /uniFB01 t index (CFI), (b) the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) and its 90% con /uniFB01 dence interval (CI); and (c) the standardized root mean square residual (SRMR). Values N 0.90 and 0.95 for the CFI respectively indicate adequate and excellent model /uniFB01 t, while values smaller than 0.08 or 0.06 for the RMSEA and SRMR respectively support acceptable and excellent model /uniFB01 t. In both samples, these results revealed the clear superiority of the ESEM measurement model [(Sample 1: χ 2 = 124.575, df = 72, p b 0.001; CFI = 0.986; RMSEA = 0.032; CI = 0.022 to 0.041; SRMR = 0.016); (Sample 2: χ 2 =161.020, df = 72, p b 0.001; CFI = 0.955; RMSEA = 0.066; CI = 0.052 to 0.079; SRMR = 0.020)], when compared to the CFA model [(Sample 1: χ 2 =421.443, df = 137, p b 0.001; CFI = 0.924; RMSEA = 0.054; CI = 0.048 to 0.059; SRMR = 0.058); (Sample 2: χ 2 = 401.719, df = 137, p b 0.001 CFI = 0.866; RMSEA = 0.082; CI = 0.073 to 0.092; SRMR = 0.070)]. This conclusion was supported by an assessment of the parameter estimates obtained from both models, which revealed generally well-de /uniFB01 ned factors, and reduced factor correlations in the ESEM [(Sample 1: | r| = 0.015 to 0.761; M | r| =0.281); (Sample 2: | r| = 0.026 to 0.446; M | r| = 0.234)], when compared to CFA model [(Sample 1: | r| = 0.057 to 0.836; M | r| = 0.366); (Sample 2: | r| = 0.021 to 0.844; M | r| =0.401)].

LPA were conducted using factor scores (speci /uniFB01 ed to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1) from the retained ESEM measurement models (e.g., Kam, Morin, Meyer, &amp; Topolnytsky, 2016; Morin &amp; Marsh, 2015). In comparison with scale scores, factor scores have the advantage of providing a partial control for measurement errors by giving more weight to items presenting lower levels of measurement errors (Kam et al., 2016; Morin &amp; Marsh, 2015; Skrondal &amp; Laake, 2001). Correlations and estimates of scale score reliability for all variables (including these factor scores) used in the present study are reported in Table 1.

Table 1 Correlations and scale score reliability ( α ) estimates for the variables used in the present study.

|                           | 1         | 2         | 3         | 4         | 5         | 6         | 7         | 8         | 9         | 10        | 11    |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-------|
| 1. Amotivation            | -         | 0.137 ⁎   | 0.190 ⁎   | - 0.200 ⁎ | - 0.396 ⁎ | - 0.401 ⁎ |           |           |           |           |       |
| 2. Ext-material           | 0.107     | -         | 0.465 ⁎   | 0.324 ⁎   | 0.191 ⁎   | 0.137 ⁎   |           |           |           |           |       |
| 3. Ext-social             | 0.79 ⁎    | 0.304 ⁎   | -         | 0.297 ⁎   | 0.015     | - 0.095 ⁎ |           |           |           |           |       |
| 4. Introjected            | - 0.039   | 0.200 ⁎   | 0.218 ⁎   | -         | 0.357 ⁎   | 0.246 ⁎   |           |           |           |           |       |
| 5. Identi /uniFB01 ed     | - 0.133   | 0.108     | 0.345 ⁎   | 0.441 ⁎   | -         | 0.761 ⁎   |           |           |           |           |       |
| 6. Intrinsic              | - 0.361 ⁎ | 0.209 ⁎   | - 0.026   | 0.399 ⁎   | 0.446 ⁎   | -         |           |           |           |           |       |
| 7. In-role performance    | - 0.161 ⁎ | - 0.084   | - 0.029   | 0.222 ⁎   | 0.247 ⁎   | 0.252 ⁎   | -         |           |           |           |       |
| 8. Extra-role performance | - 0.054   | - 0.133 ⁎ | - 0.059   | 0.207 ⁎   | 0.247 ⁎   | 0.264 ⁎   | 0.329 ⁎   | -         |           |           |       |
| 9. Engagement             | - 0.453 ⁎ | 0.035     | - 0.142 ⁎ | 0.265 ⁎   | 0.374 ⁎   | 0.660 ⁎   | 0.345 ⁎   | 0.359 ⁎   | -         |           |       |
| 10. Burnout               | 0.426 ⁎   | 0.029     | - 0.175 ⁎ | - 0.185 ⁎ | - 0.287 ⁎ | - 0.456 ⁎ | - 0.292 ⁎ | - 0.165 ⁎ | - 0.438 ⁎ | -         |       |
| 11. Job satisfaction      | - 0.506 ⁎ | 0.021     | - 0.175 ⁎ | 0.240 ⁎   | 0.331 ⁎   | 0.612 ⁎   | 0.234 ⁎   | 0.220 ⁎   | 0.646 ⁎   | - 0.500 ⁎ |       |
| α (Sample 1)              | 0.741     | 0.781     | 0.600     | 0.692     | 0.775     | 0.898     |           |           |           |           |       |
| α (Sample 2)              | 0.886     | 0.695     | 0.761     | 0.711     | 0.671     | 0.882     | 0.846     | 0.810     | 0.946     | 0.927     | 0.885 |

Note: Sample 1 is above diagonal. Sample 2 is below diagonal. External-M = external-material regulation; External-S = external-social regulation. Scores are all factor scores from preliminary models with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.

⁎ p b 0.05.

## 6.2. Latent pro /uniFB01 le analyses

Based on our expectation that 4 to 6 latent pro /uniFB01 les would be identi /uniFB01 ed, models including 1 to 8 pro /uniFB01 les were estimated in each sample using the robust Maximum Likelihood (MLR) estimator available in Mplus. The means and variances of the six motivation factors were freely estimated in all pro /uniFB01 les (Morin, Maïano, Nagengast, Marsh, Morizot &amp; Janosz, 2011; Peugh &amp; Fan, 2013), using 7000 random sets of start values, 300 iterations for each random start, and the 200 best solutions retained for /uniFB01 nal stage optimization (Hipp &amp; Bauer, 2006). All models converged on well replicated solutions.

In order to determine the optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les in each sample, it is important to consider the substantive meaning and theoretical conformity of the pro /uniFB01 les (Marsh et al., 2009; Muthén, 2003), the statistical adequacy of the solution, and a variety of statistical indicators. Among these statistical indicators, we report the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), the Consistent AIC (CAIC), the sample-adjusted BIC (ABIC), the adjusted version of the Lo, Mendell, and Rubin likelihood ratio test (LMR), and the Bootstrap Likelihood Ratio Test (BLRT). The entropy was also examined, and indicates the precision with which the cases are classi /uniFB01 ed into the pro /uniFB01 les (on a 0 to 1 scale). However, the entropy should not be used in itself to determine the optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les (Lubke &amp; Muthén, 2007; Peugh &amp; Fan, 2012, 2013, 2015; Tein, Coxe, &amp; Cham, 2013).

Extensive simulation research has looked at the performance of these various indicators to help in selecting the optimal number of latent pro /uniFB01 les in the data in the context of latent pro /uniFB01 le analyses and other forms of person-centered mixture models. Overall, these studies converge in supporting the ef /uniFB01 cacy of the CAIC, the BIC, the ABIC, and the BLRT in choosing the model which best recovers the sample's true parameters (e.g., Henson, Reise, &amp; Kim, 2007; McLachlan &amp; Peel, 2000; Morgan, 2015; Nylund, Asparouhov, &amp; Muthén, 2007; Peugh &amp; Fan, 2012, 2013, 2015; Tein et al., 2013; To /uniFB01 ghi &amp; Enders, 2008; Tolvanen, 2007; Yang, 2006). In particular, a recent simulation study (Diallo, Morin, &amp; Lu, 2016) suggest that the BIC and CAIC should be privileged under conditions of high entropy (e.g., ≥ 0.800), whereas the ABIC and BLRT appear to perform better in conditions of low entropy (e.g., ≤ 0.500). In contrast, the bulk of current research evidence suggests that, like the entropy, the AIC and LMR/ALMR should not be used in the class enumeration process (e.g., Diallo et al., 2016; Henson et al., 2007; Nylund et al., 2007; Peugh &amp; Fan, 2013; To /uniFB01 ghi &amp; Enders, 2007; Yang, 2006). In the current study, these indicators are thus simply reported to ensure a thorough disclosure of results, but will not be used to select the optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les. A lower value on the AIC, CAIC, BIC and ABIC suggests a better/uniFB01 tting model. Both the LMR and BLRT compare a k -pro /uniFB01 le model with a k1-pro /uniFB01 le model. A signi /uniFB01 cant p value indicates that the k1-pro /uniFB01 le model should be rejected in favor of a kpro /uniFB01 le model. However, since these tests are all variations of tests of statistical signi /uniFB01 cance, the class enumeration procedure can still be heavily in /uniFB02 uenced by sample size (Marsh et al., 2009). That is these indicators frequently keep on improving with the addition of latent pro /uniFB01 les to the model without reaching a minimum. In these cases, information criteria should be graphically presented through ' elbow plots ' illustrating the gains associated with additional pro /uniFB01 les (Morin &amp; Marsh, 2015; Morin, Maïano, Nagengast, Marsh, Morizot &amp; Janosz, 2011; Petras &amp; Masyn, 2010). In these plots, the point after which the slope /uniFB02 attens suggests the optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les that should be examined, together with adjacent solutions including one more and one less pro /uniFB01 le, for theoretical conformity and statistical adequacy.

## 6.3. Latent pro /uniFB01 le analyses with predictors and outcomes

Starting from the /uniFB01 nal LPA solution retained for Sample 1, we then proceeded to tests of the relations between the two dummy variables created to re /uniFB02 ect job categories and the probability of membership into the pro /uniFB01 les. These two variables were included to the /uniFB01 nal model through a multinomial logistic regression. In multinomial logistic regressions, each predictor has k -1 (with k being the number of pro /uniFB01 les) complementary effects for each possible pairwise comparison of pro /uniFB01 les. The

Table 2 Class enumeration .

|                     | Log likelihood      | #fp                 | scaling             | AIC                 | CAIC                | BIC                 | ABIC                | Entropy             | LMR                 | BLRT                |
|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) | Sample 1 ( n = 723) |
| 1 Pro /uniFB01 le   | - 5746.162          | 12                  | 1.163               | 11,516.324          | 11,583.325          | 11,571.325          | 11,533.222          | Na                  | Na                  | Na                  |
| 2 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 5054.193          | 25                  | 1.020               | 10,158.385          | 10,297.971          | 10,272.971          | 10,193.588          | 0.816               | b 0.001             | b 0.001             |
| 3 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4808.461          | 38                  | 1.135               | 9692.922            | 9905.092            | 9867.092            | 9746.431            | 0.840               | 0.002               | b 0.001             |
| 4 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4611.800          | 51                  | 1.196               | 9325.600            | 9610.354            | 9559.354            | 9397.414            | 0.861               | 0.086               | b 0.001             |
| 5 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4491.730          | 64                  | 1.118               | 9111.461            | 9468.799            | 9404.799            | 9201.581            | 0.851               | 0.018               | b 0.001             |
| 6 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4384.863          | 77                  | 1.093               | 8923.726            | 9353.648            | 9276.648            | 9032.151            | 0.867               | b 0.001             | b 0.001             |
| 7 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4291.002          | 90                  | 1.044               | 8762.005            | 9264.512            | 9174.512            | 8888.735            | 0.861               | 0.002               | b 0.001             |
| 8 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 4226.600          | 103                 | 1.099               | 8659.200            | 9234.291            | 9131.291            | 8804.236            | 0.853               | 0.162               | b 0.001             |
| Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) | Sample 2 ( n = 286) |
| 1 Pro /uniFB01 le   | - 2281.653          | 12                  | 2.0090              | 4587.305            | 4643.177            | 4631.177            | 4593.124            | Na                  | Na                  | Na                  |
| 2 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1714.199          | 25                  | 0.9661              | 3478.397            | 3594.797            | 3569.797            | 3490.520            | 0.930               | b 0.001             | b 0.001             |
| 3 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1589.459          | 38                  | 0.9764              | 3254.917            | 3431.845            | 3393.845            | 3273.344            | 0.897               | b 0.001             | b 0.001             |
| 4 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1473.405          | 51                  | 1.1226              | 3048.810            | 3286.266            | 3235.266            | 3073.540            | 0.886               | 0.023               | b 0.001             |
| 5 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1416.272          | 64                  | 1.0316              | 2960.545            | 3258.528            | 3194.528            | 2991.579            | 0.890               | 0.012               | b 0.001             |
| 6 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1380.270          | 77                  | 1.0258              | 2914.539            | 3273.051            | 3196.051            | 2951.877            | 0.906               | 0.033               | b 0.001             |
| 7 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1347.972          | 90                  | 1.0299              | 2875.944            | 3294.983            | 3204.983            | 2919.585            | 0.917               | 0.232               | b 0.001             |
| 8 Pro /uniFB01 les  | - 1315.187          | 103                 | 1.0627              | 2836.373            | 3315.940            | 3212.940            | 2886.319            | 0.911               | 0.227               | b 0.001             |

Note: #fp = number of free parameters; AIC = Akaike information criterion; CAIC = constant AIC; BIC = Bayesian information criterion; ABIC = sample size adjusted BIC; LMR = p value associated with the adjusted Lo -Mendell -Rubin likelihood ratio test; BLRT = p value associated with the bootstrap likelihood ratio test.

regression coef /uniFB01 cients re /uniFB02 ect the increase, for each unit increase in the predictor (with dummy variables this re /uniFB02 ects the difference between the job category coded 1 and the remaining job categories), that can be expected in the log-odds of the outcome (i.e., the probability of membership in one pro /uniFB01 le versus another). For simplicity, we report odds ratios (OR), re /uniFB02 ecting the change in likelihood of membership in a target pro /uniFB01 le versus a comparison pro /uniFB01 le associated with the target job category. For example, an OR of 3 suggests that employees from the target job category are three-times more likely than others to be member of the target pro /uniFB01 le (versus the comparison pro /uniFB01 le).

Then, starting from the /uniFB01 nal LPA solution retained for Sample 2, we tested the relations between pro /uniFB01 le membership and the multiple outcome variables available in this sample (performance, extra-role behaviors, job satisfaction, engagement, and burnout), through the direct inclusion of these outcomes in the model as additional pro /uniFB01 le indicators (Morin &amp; Wang, 2016). The MODEL CONSTRAINT command of Mplus was used to systematically test mean-level differences across all speci /uniFB01 c pairs of pro /uniFB01 les (using the multivariate delta method: e.g., Raykov &amp; Marcoulides, 2004).

## 7. Results

The /uniFB01 t indices for the alternative solutions estimated separately in both samples are reported in Table 2. For both samples, the CAIC, BIC, ABIC, and BLRT kept on improving with the addition of latent pro /uniFB01 les. However, we also note that the entropy values are quite high ( ≥ 0.800) for all of the estimated models in both samples. Following Diallo et al.'s (2016) recommendations, this suggests that the decision of how many pro /uniFB01 les to retain should mainly focus on the BIC and CAIC. Because these indicators failed to reach a minimum, we relied on a graphical representation of these information criteria (Morin &amp; Marsh, 2015; Morin, Maïano, Nagengast, Marsh, Morizot &amp; Janosz, 2011; Petras &amp; Masyn, 2010). These plots are reported in Fig. 1, and show that the decreases in values of most information criteria reached a plateau around 4 pro /uniFB01 les in both Samples 1 and 2. Examination of the 4-pro /uniFB01 le

Fig. 1. Elbow plot for the information criteria in Samples 1 (left) and 2 (right).

<!-- image -->

Table 3 Posterior classi /uniFB01 cation probabilities for the most likely latent pro /uniFB01 le membership (row) by latent pro /uniFB01 le (column).

|                             | Amotivated (P.1)   | Moderately autonomous (P.2)   | Highly motivated (P.3)   | Balanced (P.4)   |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------|
| Sample 1                    |                    |                               |                          |                  |
| Amotivated (P.1)            | 0.902              | 0.001                         | 0.001                    | 0.096            |
| Moderately autonomous (P.2) | 0.003              | 0.976                         | 0.014                    | 0.007            |
| Highly motivated (P.3)      | 0.000              | 0.008                         | 0.938                    | 0.054            |
| Balanced (P.4)              | 0.041              | 0.010                         | 0.032                    | 0.917            |
| Sample 2                    |                    |                               |                          |                  |
| Amotivated (P.1)            | 0.942              | 0.004                         | 0.000                    | 0.054            |
| Moderately autonomous (P.2) | 0.000              | 0.925                         | 0.034                    | 0.041            |
| Highly motivated (P.3)      | 0.000              | 0.031                         | 0.941                    | 0.028            |
| Balanced (P.4)              | 0.007              | 0.023                         | 0.021                    | 0.949            |

Note. P: pro le.

/uniFB01

solutions and of the adjacent 3- and 5-pro /uniFB01 le solutions showed that all solutions were fully proper statistically in both samples. This examination also revealed that adding a fourth pro /uniFB01 le always resulted in the addition of a well-de /uniFB01 ned qualitatively distinct and theoretically meaningful pro /uniFB01 le to the solution, whereas adding a /uniFB01 fth pro /uniFB01 le resulted in the arbitrary division of one of the existing pro /uniFB01 le into smaller pro /uniFB01 les differing only quantitatively from one another. As this additional small pro /uniFB01 le did not add anything meaningful in theoretical terms (i.e., it has the same meaning as already present pro /uniFB01 les), the more parsimonious 4pro /uniFB01 le solution was thus retained for each sample, in line with the conclusion suggested by the statistical indicators. This solution provides a reasonable level of classi /uniFB01 cation accuracy, with an entropy value of 0.861 in Sample 1 and 0.886 in Sample 2. Classi/uniFB01 cation probabilities are presented in Table 3. These results clearly demonstrate the high level of classi /uniFB01 cation accuracy of these solutions, with average posterior probabilities of class membership in the dominant pro /uniFB01 le varying from 0.887 to 0.950 in Sample 1 and from 0.923 to 0.980 in Sample 2, with low cross-probabilities (varying from ≤ 0.001 to 0.073 in Sample 1 and from b 0.001 to 0.042 in Sample 2).

The retained 4-pro /uniFB01 le solutions are represented in Fig. 2 for Sample 1, and Fig. 3 for Sample 2 (with exact numerical results reported in Table 4). These /uniFB01 gures make it rapidly obvious that the pro /uniFB01 le structure is remarkably similar across samples, providing clear support to the generalizability of the pro /uniFB01 les. For both samples, Pro /uniFB01 le 1 characterized amotivated employees (corresponding to 27.6% of the employees in Sample 1 and 13.1% in Sample 2) presenting very high levels of amotivation and average to low levels on all other motivation factors. For this pro /uniFB01 le, it is noteworthy that levels of motivation decrease as a direct function of their relative degree of self-determination as proposed by SDT. Pro /uniFB01 le 2 (11.5% in Sample 1; 27.8% in Sample 2) characterizes employees presenting very low levels of social and material forms of external regulations, low levels of amotivation and introjection, and average or slightly above average levels of identi /uniFB01 ed regulation and intrinsic motivation. This moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le thus also appears to follow the continuum structure of self-regulation proposed by SDT in that it presents a single dominant regulation type with levels of other regulations tapering off as they become more theoretically distant. Pro /uniFB01 le 3 characterizes highly motivated employees (25.6% in Sample 1; 22% in Sample 2) presenting a relatively low level of amotivation and moderate to high levels on the other types of regulations which increase as a direct function of their relative degree of self-regulation according to SDT. This pro /uniFB01 le clearly presents the highest levels on the more autonomous forms of motivation (identi /uniFB01 ed regulation and intrinsic motivation) out of all pro /uniFB01 les identi /uniFB01 ed in both samples. This highly autonomous pro /uniFB01 le thus also appears

Fig. 2. Sample 1 pro /uniFB01 les ( n =723). Note . Indicators are estimated from factor scores with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Sample 2 pro /uniFB01 les ( n =286). Note . Indicators are estimated from factor scores with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

<!-- image -->

to follow the continuum structure of self-regulation proposed by SDT. Finally, Pro /uniFB01 le 4 characterizes employees presenting average levels of all regulations although the results obtained in Sample 2 suggest that this pro /uniFB01 le may also show a tendency to have slightly above average levels of external regulation, and slightly below average levels of autonomous forms of regulation. This pro/uniFB01 le, which also follows the self-regulation continuum proposed by SDT, thus appears to describe employees with balanced motivation (35.3% in Sample 1; 37.1% in Sample 2).

## 7.1. Predictors of pro /uniFB01 le membership

Results from the multinominal logistic regression examining relations between job category and pro /uniFB01 le membership in Sample 1 are reported in Table 5. Given that both dummy predictors were simultaneously considered, the blue-collar employees were used as the comparison group, with the effects of the /uniFB01 rst dummy predictor representing differences between white-collar technology sector employees and all other employees, and the second representing differences between white-collar governmental employees and all other employees. These results show that white-collar technology employees presented a lower likelihood of membership in the moderately autonomously motivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 2) than in all other pro /uniFB01 les when compared to employees from other job categories. In contrast, white-collar governmental employees presented a greater likelihood of membership into the least desirable amotivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 1) than in all other pro /uniFB01 les when compared to all other employees. These employees were also less likely to be in the moderately autonomously motivated (Pro /uniFB01 le 2) or highly motivated (Pro /uniFB01 le 3) pro /uniFB01 les than in the balanced pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 4).

Table 4 Mean levels of motivation in the retained latent pro /uniFB01 le models .

|                    | Amotivated (P.1)   | Amotivated (P.1)   | Moderately autonomous (P.2)   | Moderately autonomous (P.2)   | Highly motivated (P.3)   | Highly motivated (P.3)   | Balanced (P.4)   | Balanced (P.4)   |
|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|------------------|------------------|
|                    | Mean               | Variance           | Mean                          | Variance                      | Mean                     | Variance                 | Mean             | Variance         |
| Sample 1           |                    |                    |                               |                               |                          |                          |                  |                  |
| Amotivation        | 1.025              | 1.169              | - 0.554                       | 0.019                         | - 0.515                  | 0.019                    | - 0.249          | 0.080            |
| External-M         | 0.053              | 0.841              | - 1.075                       | 0.112                         | 0.403                    | 0.632                    | 0.015            | 0.581            |
| External-S         | 0.242              | 0.786              | - 1.308                       | 0.006                         | 0.192                    | 0.889                    | 0.095            | 0.63             |
| Introjected        | - 0.331            | 0.764              | - 0.467                       | 0.761                         | 0.605                    | 0.489                    | - 0.027          | 0.532            |
| Identi /uniFB01 ed | - 0.840            | 1.005              | 0.143                         | 0.498                         | 0.901                    | 0.119                    | - 0.041          | 0.222            |
| Intrinsic          | - 0.867            | 1.009              | 0.288                         | 0.54                          | 0.961                    | 0.126                    | - 0.11           | 0.250            |
| Sample 2           |                    |                    |                               |                               |                          |                          |                  |                  |
| Amotivation        | 1.679              | 4.131              | - 0.338                       | 0.002                         | - 0.264                  | 0.002                    | - 0.183          | 0.004            |
| External-M         | - 0.050            | 1.152              | - 0.675                       | 0.193                         | 0.514                    | 0.461                    | 0.218            | 0.608            |
| External-S         | 0.292              | 0.624              | - 0.805                       | 0.260                         | 0.548                    | 0.824                    | 0.175            | 0.608            |
| Introjected        | - 0.335            | 1.301              | - 0.236                       | 0.510                         | 0.909                    | 0.183                    | - 0.243          | 0.504            |
| Identi /uniFB01 ed | - 0.597            | 1.352              | - 0.034                       | 0.611                         | 0.823                    | 0.276                    | - 0.251          | 0.399            |
| Intrinsic          | - 1.450            | 0.974              | 0.437                         | 0.267                         | 0.961                    | 0.091                    | - 0.384          | 0.424            |

Note. P: pro /uniFB01 le; External-M = external-material regulation; External-S = external-social regulation; indicators are estimated from factor scores with mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

Table 5 Results from multinominal logistic regression evaluating relations between job type and latent pro /uniFB01 le membership (Sample 1).

| Job category   | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 2   | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 2   | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 3   | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 3   |          | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 4   | Pro /uniFB01 le 1 vs. 4   |
|----------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|----------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|                | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  | OR                        | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  | OR                        |          | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  | OR                        |
| White collar   | 1.118 (0.413) ⁎⁎          | 3.059 ⁎⁎                  | - 0.320 (0.429)           |                           | 0.726    | 0.235 (0.397)             | 1.265                     |
| Government     | 1.544 (0.397) ⁎⁎          | 4.683 ⁎⁎                  | 1.557 (0.303)             | ⁎⁎                        | 4.745 ⁎⁎ | 0.803                     | (0.363) ⁎ 2.232 ⁎         |
|                | Pro /uniFB01 le 2 vs. 3   |                           | Pro /uniFB01 le 2 vs. 4   |                           |          | Pro /uniFB01 le 3 vs. 4   |                           |
|                | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  | OR                        | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  |                           | OR       | Coef /uniFB01 cient (SE)  | OR                        |
| White collar   | - 1.438 (0.485) ⁎⁎        | 0.237 ⁎⁎                  | - 0.883 (0.407) ⁎         | 0.413                     | ⁎        | 0.555 (0.444)             | 1.742                     |
| Government     | 0.014 (0.351)             | 1.014                     | - 0.740 (0.351) ⁎         | 0.477 ⁎                   |          | - 0.754 (0.267) ⁎⁎        | 0.470 ⁎⁎                  |

Note. OR = odds ratio; SE = standard error of the coef /uniFB01 cient.

⁎ p b 0.05.

⁎⁎ p b 0.01.

Fig. 4. Outcomes associated with pro /uniFB01 le membership. Note . Indicators are estimated from factor scores with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

<!-- image -->

## 7.2. Outcomes of pro /uniFB01 le membership

Outcomes variables were added to the /uniFB01 nal 4-pro /uniFB01 le solution retained for Sample 2. Mean levels of each outcome across the four pro /uniFB01 les are graphically depicted in Fig. 4, while the exact mean levels of the outcomes and the statistical signi /uniFB01 cance for each pairwise comparison of outcome levels across pro /uniFB01 les are reported in Table 6. Most of these comparisons are statistically significant, with only a few exceptions, supporting the predictive validity of the extracted latent pro /uniFB01 les. Starting with performance, the results show that levels of both in-role and extra-role performance are highest in both the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 3) and the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 2), and lowest among both the amotivated (Pro /uniFB01 le 1) and balanced (Pro /uniFB01 le 4) pro /uniFB01 les, which could not be distinguished from one another. Levels of job satisfaction and engagement signi /uniFB01 cantly differed in a similar manner across pro /uniFB01 les, being highest among the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 3) and the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le (Pro/uniFB01 le 2), followed by the balanced pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 4), and lowest among the amotivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 1). Finally, levels of burnout were highest in the balanced pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 4), followed by the amotivated pro /uniFB01 le (Pro /uniFB01 le 1), and then by both the highly motivated (Pro /uniFB01 le 3) and moderately autonomous (Pro /uniFB01 le 2) pro /uniFB01 les, which could not be distinguished from one another. 1

## 8. Discussion

This study aimed to extend motivation theory and research through the identi /uniFB01 cation of pro /uniFB01 les of employees based on the simultaneous consideration of the six forms of behavioral regulation assumed to form the underlying continuum of self-determination proposed by SDT (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985). The current study provides an incremental contribution to the literature, /uniFB01 nding four motivation pro /uniFB01 les in the work domain that replicated across two reasonably large and heterogeneous samples of employees from two different countries. Prior research has generally been plagued by the reliance on small samples, the use of cluster analyses, and the arbitrary dichotomization of behavioral regulations into two broad categories of autonomous and controlled

1 Upon request from a reviewer, all analyses were replicated while controlling for gender. These additional models converged on results substantively identical to those reported here. Additional details are available upon request from the corresponding author.

.

Table 6 Outcome means and pairwise comparisons between pro /uniFB01 les (Sample 2)

|                        | Standardized pro /uniFB01 le means   | Standardized pro /uniFB01 le means   | Standardized pro /uniFB01 le means   | Standardized pro /uniFB01 le means   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Pro /uniFB01 le comparisons   | Summary of comparisons   |
|------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|
|                        | Amotivated (P.1)                     | Moderately autonomous (P.2)          | Highly motivated (P.3)               | Balanced (P.4)                       | 1 vs 2                        | 1 vs 3                        | 1 vs 4                        | 2 vs 3                        | 2 vs 4                        | 3 vs 4                        | Summary of comparisons   |
| In-role performance    | - 0.408                              | 0.267                                | 0.400                                | - 0.249                              | - 0.675 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.808 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.159                       | - 0.133                       | 0.516 ⁎⁎                      | 0.650 ⁎⁎                      | 1 = 4 b 2 = 3            |
| Extra-role performance | - 0.202                              | 0.319                                | 0.496                                | - 0.408                              | - 0.521 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.697 ⁎⁎                    | 0.206                         | - 0.177                       | 0.727 ⁎⁎                      | 0.904 ⁎⁎                      | 1 = 4 b 2 = 3            |
| Job satisfaction       | - 1.544                              | 0.505                                | 0.646                                | - 0.138                              | - 2.049 ⁎⁎                    | - 2.190 ⁎⁎                    | - 1.406 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.140                       | 0.643 ⁎⁎                      | 0.784 ⁎⁎                      | 1 b 4 b 2 = 3            |
| Engagement             | - 1.283                              | 0.538                                | 0.684                                | - 0.271                              | - 1.821 ⁎⁎                    | - 1.967 ⁎⁎                    | - 1.012 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.146                       | 0.809 ⁎⁎                      | 0.955 ⁎⁎                      | 1 b 4 b 2 = 3            |
| Burnout                | 1.257                                | - 0.372                              | - 0.423                              | 0.030                                | 1.629 ⁎⁎                      | 1.681 ⁎⁎                      | - 1.228 ⁎⁎                    | 0.051                         | - 0.401 ⁎⁎                    | - 0.453 ⁎⁎                    | 2 = 3 b 4 b 1            |

Note. Indicators are estimated from factor scores with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

⁎ p b 0.05.

⁎⁎ p b 0.01.

regulations (Graves et al., 2015; Moran et al., 2012; Van den Broeck et al., 2013). In contrast, this study relied on two large samples of employees from Canada and Belgium from across multiple industries and job categories. Additionally, unlike much of the past person-centered research, the current study used state of the art analyses to not only identify an optimal number of pro /uniFB01 les, but also to include antecedents and outcome variables in a statistically more advanced and rigorous manner than previously possible. A /uniFB01 nal key contribution of this study lies in the demonstration of the value of considering the whole range of behavioral regulations in the estimation of motivation pro /uniFB01 les, as opposed to dichotomizing motivation into autonomous and controlled composite variables. In particular, the nature of the pro /uniFB01 les observed in the present study, which generalized across samples, supported the underlying continuum structure of motivation proposed by SDT (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985). In sum, the comprehensive sampling and analyses employed in the current research lend support to the robustness and reliability of the detected pro /uniFB01 les.

In line with prior research conducted in the education, sport, and work domains, our results revealed four latent pro /uniFB01 les, which were replicated across the two samples. Particularly important is the observation that these pro /uniFB01 les revealed qualitative and quantitative differences in employees' experiences of work motivation. These pro /uniFB01 les showed that not only do employees experience varying amounts of overall motivation or self-determination, they also tend to experience different types of motivation. Additionally, our results revealed that the relative likelihood of membership into these pro /uniFB01 les differed as a function of job type, and that it was associated with a variety of work-related performance and wellbeing outcomes. Meyer, Morin, and Vandenberghe (2015) recently noted that the value of person-centered analyses in the work domain depends not only on their ability to identify subgroups of employees differing from one another meaningfully on a set of variables, but also on the ability to demonstrate that these subgroups emerge regularly across samples, can be predicted in a meaningful manner, and are relevant to the prediction of work outcomes. As they met all of these criteria, our results can be considered highly meaningful.

As anticipated, we found a pro /uniFB01 le containing predominantly autonomous forms of regulation, a balanced pro /uniFB01 le containing roughly equal levels of all regulations, and at least one pro /uniFB01 le containing both autonomous and controlled forms of regulation. External regulation seemed to stand on its own in these pro /uniFB01 les, whereas introjected regulation seemed to cluster more closely with autonomous forms of regulation, showing the importance of considering regulations at this level instead of aggregating them into global controlled and autonomous variables. For instance, the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le was characterized by high levels of intrinsic motivation, identi /uniFB01 ed regulation, and introjected regulation, and slightly above average levels of external regulation. Looking at the positive performance and wellbeing outcomes associated with this pro /uniFB01 le, it appears to be one of the most desirable pro /uniFB01 les. Our results further revealed that white-collar technology sector employees are somewhat more disposed to correspond to this pro /uniFB01 le compared to the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le. However, these white-collar workers were equally as likely to correspond to the amotivated and balanced pro /uniFB01 les as to the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le. This suggests that job characteristics known to be more prevalent in the white-collar technology sector, such as the more frequent use of participative management, enriched job designs and task variety, and even pro /uniFB01 t-sharing schemes, may result in situations where employees either have their basic psychological needs met and therefore experience autonomous forms of motivation (Blais et al., 1993; Gagné &amp; Forest, 2008; Gagné et al., 1997, 2010), or alternatively experience amotivation or external pressure to perform -a kind of polarizing effect in which these practices either work well or fail badly.

The moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le was characterized by low levels of external and introjected regulations, and above average levels of identi /uniFB01 ed regulation and intrinsic motivation. This pro /uniFB01 le is similar to the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le in its shape, but not in the overall level of motivation. This pro /uniFB01 le also presented above average levels of performance and wellbeing, performing as well as the highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le. This indicates that while the overall quantity of motivation may play some role in in /uniFB02 uencing work outcomes, the shape of the pro /uniFB01 le appears to have more important outcome implications. Speci /uniFB01 cally, as long as a pro /uniFB01 le is dominated by autonomous rather than controlled forms of regulation, individuals will display above average levels of performance and wellbeing. This /uniFB01 nding suggests that increasing all motivation types may not improve performance or wellbeing. Rather, it appears more important to increase identi /uniFB01 ed regulation and intrinsic motivation, while ensuring that they remain higher than external regulation.

The moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le becomes even more interesting when compared to the balanced pro /uniFB01 le, given that both are characterized by similar amounts of overall motivation. However, while the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le is dominated by autonomous motivation, the balanced pro /uniFB01 le is generally average across all regulations. Such a comparison allows for a clear examination of the relative importance of shape effects while holding reasonably constant the overall quantity of motivation. The results showed that the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le was far more desirable than the balanced pro /uniFB01 le, which was associated with signi /uniFB01 cantly lower levels on all indicators of performance and wellbeing. Thus, motivation pro /uniFB01 les dominated by an emphasis on meaning and interest appear to lead to higher performance and wellbeing, compared to the balanced or amotivated pro/uniFB01 les, regardless of overall amount of motivation. These results comparing the highly autonomous and moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 les, as well as the moderately autonomous and balanced pro /uniFB01 les, are important. Indeed, these comparisons suggest that, far from being an effective motivator (Cerasoli et al., 2014; Gerhart &amp; Fang, 2015), an emphasis on social and material rewards may have a negative impact on performance when it is not accompanied by a comparable emphasis on meaning, interest and pleasure (Gagné &amp; Deci, 2005). Worse, this negative impact may be accompanied by an equally negative impact on wellbeing, making it doubly dif /uniFB01 cult for these employees to increase their performance in the long term (e.g., Ryan, Deci, &amp; Grolnick, 1995). Interestingly, the previously discussed results regarding the fact that the moderately autonomous and highly motivated pro /uniFB01 les are associated with similarly desirable outcomes suggest that high levels of autonomous regulations appear to protect employees from the effects of high levels of more controlled forms of regulations.

Finally, the amotivated pro /uniFB01 le characterizes employees for whom work is neither motivated by meaning, guilt, enjoyment, or rewards but are rather mainly amotivated , suggesting they may possibly feel ' trapped ' in their position due to high perceived sacri /uniFB01 ces associated with leaving (i.e., continuance commitment; Morin, Meyer, McInerney, Marsh, &amp; Ganotice, 2015). In line with our expectations, white collar governmental employees, who tend to be exposed to more rigid bureaucratic structures, presented a signi /uniFB01 cantly greater likelihood of membership into this pro /uniFB01 le (De Cooman et al., 2013; Gillet et al., 2013), followed by membership in the balanced pro /uniFB01 le, strongly suggesting that characteristics of this job are highly detrimental to autonomous motivation. Also in line with our expectations, employees from this amotivated pro /uniFB01 le presented the lowest levels of wellbeing out of all pro /uniFB01 les, and levels of performance that were undistinguishable from those observed in the balanced pro /uniFB01 le. This pro /uniFB01 le appeared to be the least desirable.

It is interesting to note that the amotivated and highly motivated pro /uniFB01 les both follow the expected continuum structure so closely that it could be argued that for these pro /uniFB01 les a single factor representing global self-determined motivation (e.g., Howard et al., 2016) could be suf /uniFB01 cient to describe these employees satisfactorily. Alternately, for the moderately autonomous and balanced pro /uniFB01 les where the pro /uniFB01 les do not follow the continuum structure as perfectly, it appears necessary to take into account qualitative distinctions between the various motivation subscales in order to obtain a complete picture of employees' work motivation.

In regards to previous person-centered research on work motivation, the current results provide an incremental contribution to the literature by replicating, in part, the pro /uniFB01 les found by Graves et al. (2015), and expanding greatly on the cluster analytic results of Van den Broeck et al. (2013) and Moran et al. (2012). All of these studies succeeded in identifying the most extreme pro /uniFB01 les, including a highly motivated pro /uniFB01 le characterized by above average levels of all types of motivation, and an amotivated pro /uniFB01 le characterized by below average levels on most types of motivation. The moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le identi /uniFB01 ed in the current study also largely replicates the self-determined pro /uniFB01 le found by Graves et al. (2015) in a sample of managers. The balanced pro /uniFB01 le, which shows a slight tendency towards an external focus, is a more novel /uniFB01 nding of the current study. Not only has this pro /uniFB01 le allowed for a highly insightful comparison between two pro /uniFB01 les characterized by similar global amounts of motivation but different shapes, but it suggests that some employees draw motivation from multiple sources equally but do not seem to thrive in their workplace as a result of it.

Finally, the current study provides evidence of generalizability of the reported pro /uniFB01 les. Like with variable-centered research, the con /uniFB01 dence with which person-centered results can be used to guide practice depends on replicability and the convergence of results obtained from a variety of samples. Through multiple samples and studies, it becomes possible to identify a set of core pro /uniFB01 les which are commonly occurring in most work contexts, and more peripheral pro /uniFB01 les which may arise due to speci /uniFB01 c workplace circumstances or in speci /uniFB01 c subgroups of employees (Solinger, Van Olffen, Roe, &amp; Hofmans, 2013). The current study offers a set of four core pro /uniFB01 les which, interestingly, replicate some of the pro /uniFB01 les found by Graves et al. (2015). This suggests that the subset of replicated pro /uniFB01 les are more likely to re /uniFB02 ect core pro /uniFB01 les of employee motivation, whereas the additional pro /uniFB01 les reported by Graves et al. may be more peripheral, arising speci /uniFB01 cally in manager sub-populations.

In sum, our results incrementally add to previous research by examining work motivation pro /uniFB01 les in the most rigorous manner available to date (i.e., through the incorporation of all regulation types into state-of-the-art LPA) with reasonably large and heterogeneous samples of employees from two countries. Additionally we provide initial evidence which demonstrates that pro/uniFB01 le membership varies as a function of job category with white-collar technology sector employees less likely to be in the moderately autonomously motivated pro /uniFB01 le, while government employees are more likely to be amotivated in their work. Lastly our results show that pro /uniFB01 le membership has meaningful implications for a wide range of work outcomes with pro /uniFB01 le characterized by predominantly autonomous forms of motivation being associated with more positive performance and wellbeing outcomes.

## 8.1. Limitations and directions for future research

Though the current study presents several advantages over previous research, it also presents notable limitations. As with all cross-sectional research it is impossible to reach clear conclusions regarding the directionality of the associations between the observed motivational pro /uniFB01 les and the so-called outcome variables on the basis of a single study. The possibility thus remains that

the observed associations follow reversed or even reciprocal relations as performance and wellbeing may themselves act as predictor of employee motivation pro /uniFB01 les. However, lending con /uniFB01 dence to the current interpretations, prior longitudinal research has supported the idea of directional relationships through which motivation levels predict later levels of performance and wellbeing (e.g., Baker, 2003; Dysvik &amp; Kuvaas, 2013). Still, future research is needed to clarify this issue, and particularly to investigate possible reciprocal relations among these constructs (e.g., Morin et al., 2016). Longitudinal studies will also be needed to examine the development and temporal stability of motivation pro /uniFB01 les. It would be most useful to know how, and under which conditions, the different pro /uniFB01 les found in the present study develop and evolve over time, considering both organizational newcomers (Bauer &amp; Erdogan, 2014) as well as employees at later career stages (Gould &amp; Hawkins, 1978). Like the present study, future personcentered research should also strive to favor LPA over more traditional cluster analyses for reasons covered comprehensively elsewhere (Meyer &amp; Morin, 2016; Morin, Maïano, Nagengast, Marsh, Morizot &amp; Janosz, 2011; Vermunt &amp; Magidson, 2002). In particular, LPA tends to rely on far less stringent assumptions, which can be relaxed as needed, relative to cluster analyses, as well as a lower level of reactivity to measurement scales and clustering algorithm. Furthermore, LPA allows for the direct incorporation of covariates into the model, without the need to rely on suboptimal two-step strategies. Finally, research would also bene /uniFB01 t from devoting attention to the effects of speci /uniFB01 c modi /uniFB01 able organizational design factors, such as organizational structure, job design, leadership style, and compensation systems, on membership into speci /uniFB01 c motivational pro /uniFB01 les. While our results suggest a clear relation between job categories and membership into speci /uniFB01 c pro /uniFB01 les, a /uniFB01 ner grained analysis of the mechanisms involved in these relations would have important practical relevance to the design of speci /uniFB01 c interventions to improve employee motivation. In this regard, it would be particularly useful to know how organizational changes, such as job design changes and compensation system changes, are able to predict changes in pro /uniFB01 le membership that would affect transitions from one pro /uniFB01 le to another.

## 8.2. Practical implications

In person-centered research, evidence for generalizability is built from an accumulation of studies, from which it becomes possible to identify a core set of pro /uniFB01 les emerging with regularity, together with more peripheral pro /uniFB01 les emerging irregularly under speci /uniFB01 c conditions (Solinger et al., 2013). The fact that the pro /uniFB01 les identi /uniFB01 ed in this study are in line with theoretical expectations and emerged consistently across two independent samples of employees recruited in two countries supports their generalizability. Though additional research is needed, we can suggest that organizations can use these four pro /uniFB01 les to think about how employees falling into these pro /uniFB01 les can be best managed. For example, knowing that the balanced pro /uniFB01 le has lower than average performance, probably because of a lack of meaning and enjoyment, organizations could try to provide meaning (e.g., through task signi /uniFB01 cance; Grant, 2008) and stimulation (e.g., through job redesign; Hackman &amp; Oldham, 1975) to employees. Speci /uniFB01 cally, employers may /uniFB01 nd that while a job has inherent meaningfulness and intrinsically enjoyable factors, employee motivation, and therefore performance, remains below expectations. Results from this study indicate that this may occur when external motivators are equally in /uniFB02 uential as more autonomous factors (such as is the case in the balanced pro /uniFB01 le). In these conditions, reducing the external focus and promoting more autonomously-driven reasons could be enough to nudge employees away from the balanced pro /uniFB01 le, with its largely below average outcomes, and into the moderately autonomous pro /uniFB01 le. Such a small adjustment could lead to employees being driven predominately by autonomous factors and subsequently performing more successfully and experiencing greater wellbeing. As such, knowing that autonomous motivation is relatively more important than external regulations in promoting performance and wellbeing, organizations may wish to focus more on meaning and enjoyment than on rewards and punishments.

The drawback of the variable-centered approach is that it often leads to thinking about an intervention that will improve a variable (e.g., intrinsic motivation) without taking into consideration what it may do to other forms of motivation (e.g., introjection). Conversely, the person-centered approach allows managers to consider employees as whole entities, rather than focusing narrowly on isolated individual characteristics. This approach recognizes the complexity of human motivation and behavior, and as such may provide a more complete and integrated description of this reality.

Our results could also prove particularly useful in informing the long-standing debate on the impact of incentives on work motivation. Gerhart and Fang (2015, also see Cerasoli et al., 2014) recently argued that controlled types of motivation may yield positive outcomes and that these motivation types could be promoted through the use of monetary incentives. Results of the current study suggest a relatively weak association between external material regulation and performance, and offer no support for the proposition that external rewards are successful in increasing performance when accompanied by autonomous forms of motivation. Similar conclusions have been put forward in previous person-centered research by Van den Broeck et al. (2013) and Moran et al. (2012), who also found more positive outcomes associated with more autonomously driven pro /uniFB01 les than pro /uniFB01 les driven by controlled regulations even when accounting for differing levels of global motivation.

In regard to the outcomes considered in this study, it is clear that organizations should attempt to promote pro /uniFB01 les characterized by relatively higher levels of autonomous than external forms of regulations, through meaning making and the stimulation of people's interests for the work they do. It seems that as long as organizations can achieve this, they do not need to focus so much on promoting external regulation through material and social rewards or punishments. Our results thus indicate that it is not worth promoting controlled forms of motivation in addition to promoting autonomous forms of motivation, as has been argued by Gerhart and Fang (2015). Furthermore, the outcomes associated with the externally regulated pro /uniFB01 le suggest that there is an important risk associated with focusing on the promotion of external forms of regulations. As such, it appears that organizations would bene /uniFB01 t more from a focus on nurturing more autonomous forms of motivation through increases in job meaningfulness, interest, and autonomy, than from a focus on social and material rewards.

## Acknowledgements

Preparation of this article was facilitated through funds from the Australian Postgraduate Award scholarship awarded to the /uniFB01 rst author, as well as grants from the Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Société et la Culture and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada , and from the Society for Human Resource Management awarded to the second author, and a grant from the Australian Research Council (LP140100100) awarded to the third author.

## References

Abramis, D. J. (1994). Relationship of job stressors to job performance: Linear or inverted-u? Psychological Reports , 75 , 547 -558.

Asparouhov, T., &amp; Muthén, B. O. (2009). Exploratory structural equation modeling. Structural Equation Modeling , 16 , 397 -438.

- Asparouhov, T., Muthén, B., &amp; Morin, A. J. S. (2015). Bayesian structural equation modeling with cross-loadings and residual covariances: Comments on Stromeyer et al. Journal of Management , 41 , 1561 -1577.
- Baker, S. R. (2003). A prospective longitudinal investigation of social problem-solving appraisals on adjustment to university, stress, health, and academic motivation and performance. Personality and Individual Differences , 35 , 569 -591.

Battistelli, A., Galletta, M., Portoghese, I., &amp; Vandenberghe, C. (2013). Mindsets of commitment and motivation. The Journal of Psychology , 147 , 17 -48.

Bauer, T. N., &amp; Erdogan, B. (2014). Delineating and reviewing the role of newcomer capital in organizational socialization. Annual review of organizational psychology and organizational behavior , Vol. 1 . (pp. 439 -457).

Blais, M. R., Brière, N. M., Lachance, L., Riddle, A. S., &amp; Vallerand, R. J. (1993). L'inventaire des motivations au travail de Blais. Revue québécoise de psychologie , 14 (3), 185 -215.

Boiché, J., Sarrazin, P., Grouzet, F., Pelletier, P., &amp; Chanal, J. (2008). Students' motivational profiles and achievement outcomes in physical education: A self-determina- tion perspective.

Journal of Educational Psychology

,

100

, 688

-

701.

- Cerasoli, C., Nicklin, J., &amp; Ford, M. (2014). Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic incentives jointly predict performance: A 40 year meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin , 140 , 980 -1008.
- Chemolli, E., &amp; Gagné, M. (2014). Evidence against the continuum structure underlying motivation measures derived from self-determination theory. Psychological Assessment , 26 , 575 -585.
- De Cooman, R., Stynen, D., Van den Broeck, A., Sels, L., &amp; De Witte, H. (2013). How job characteristics relate to need satisfaction and autonomous motivation: Implications for work effort. Journal of Applied Psychology , 43 , 1342 -1352.
- De Witte, H., Hooge, J., Vandoorne, J., &amp; Glorieux, I. (2001). Prettig werken in een gezonde samenleving. Omvang, verschillen en gevolgen van arbeidstevredenheid in Vlaanderen. In Administratie Planning en Statistiek (Ed.), Vlaanderen gepeild! De Vlaamse overheid en burgeronderzoek 2001 (pp. 73 -98). Brussel: Ministerie van de Vlaamse Gemeenschap.
- Deci, E. L., &amp; Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum.
- Diallo, T. M. O., Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Lu, H. (2016). The impact of total and partial inclusion or exclusion of active and inactive time invariant covariates in growth mixture models. Psychological Methods (in press).
- Dysvik, A., &amp; Kuvaas, B. (2013). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation as predictors of work effort: The moderating role of achievement goals. British Journal of Social Psychology , 52 , 412 -430.
- Gagné, M. (2014). The Oxford handbook of work engagement, motivation, and self determination theory. New York, NY, United States: Oxford University.

Gagné, M., &amp; Deci, E. L. (2005). Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 26 , 331 -362.

Gagné, M., &amp; Forest, J. (2008). The study of compensation systems through the lens of self-determination theory: 35 years of debate. Canadian Psychology , 49 , 225 -232.

Gagné, M., Forest, J., Gilbert, M. -H., Aubé, C., Morin, E., &amp; Malorni, A. (2010). The motivation at work scale: Validation evidence in two languages. Educational and Psychological Measurement , 79 , 628 -646.

- Gagné, M., Forest, J., Vansteenkiste, M., Crevier-Braud, L., Van den Broeck, A., Kristin-Aspeli, A., ... Westbye, C. (2015). The multidimensional work motivation scale: Validation evidence in seven languages and nine countries. Journal of Work &amp; Organizational Psychology , 24 , 178 -196.
- Gagné, M., Senécal, C. B., &amp; Koestner, R. (1997). Proximal job characteristics, feelings of empowerment, and intrinsic motivation: A multidimensional model. Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 27 , 1222 -1240.

Gerhart, B., &amp; Fang, M. (2015). Pay, intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, performance, and creativity: Revisiting long-held beliefs.

3

,

Vol. 2

. (pp. 489

521).

- Gillet, N., Berjot, S., Vallerand, R. J., Amoura, C., &amp; Rosnet, E. (2012). Examining the motivation -performance relationship in competitive sport: A cluster-analytic approach. International Journal of Sport Psychology , 43 , 79 -102.

-

- Gillet, N., Gagné, M., Sauvagère, S., &amp; Fouquereau, E. (2012). The role of supervisor autonomy support, organizational support, and autonomous and controlled motivation in predicting employees' satisfaction and turnover intentions. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 22 , 1 -11.
- Gillet, N., Berjot, S., &amp; Paty, B. (2009b). Profil motivationnel et performance sportive [Motivational profile and sport performance]. Psychologie Française , 54 , 173 -190.

Gillet, N., Vallerand, R., &amp; Paty, P. (2013). Situational motivational profiles and performance with elite performers. Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 43 , 1200 -1210. Gillet, N., Vallerand, R., &amp; Rosnet, R. (2009a). Motivational clusters and performance in a real-life setting. Motivation and Emotion , 33 , 49 -62.

- Gould, S., &amp; Hawkins, B. (1978). Organizational career stage as a moderator of the satisfaction performance relationship. Academy of Management Journal , 21 , 434 -450. Grant, A. M. (2008). The significance of task significance: Job performance effects, relational mechanisms, and boundary conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology , 93 ,
- 108 -124.
- Graves, L. M., Cullen, K. L., Lester, H. F., Ruderman, M. N., &amp; Gentry, W. A. (2015). Managerial motivational profiles: Composition, antecedents, and consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 87 , 32 -42.
- Grolnick, W. S., &amp; Ryan, R. M. (1987). Autonomy in children's learning: An experimental and individual difference investigation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 (5), 890.
- Guay, F., Morin, A. J. S., Litalien, D., Valois, P., &amp; Vallerand, R. J. (2015). Application of exploratory structural equation modeling to evaluate the academic motivation scale. The Journal of Experimental Education , 83 , 51 -82.
- Hackman, J. R., &amp; Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey. Journal of Applied Psychology , 60 , 159 -170.
- Hayenga, A., &amp; Corpus, J. (2010). Profiles of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: A person-centered approach to motivation and achievement in school. Motivation and Emotion , 34 , 371 -383.
- Henson, J. M., Reise, S. P., &amp; Kim, K. H. (2007). Detecting mixtures from structural model differences using latent variable mixture modeling: A comparison of relative model fit statistics. Structural Equation Modeling , 14 , 202 -226.
- Hipp, J. R., &amp; Bauer, D. J. (2006). Local solutions in the estimation of growth mixture models. Psychological Methods , 11 , 36 -53.
- Howard, J. L., Gagné, M., Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Forest, J. (2016). Using bifactor exploratory structural equation modeling to test for a continuum structure of motivation. Journal of Management. Early View: . http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206316645653 (in press).
- Hu, L. -T., &amp; Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling , 6 , 1 -55.
- Kam, C., Morin, A. J. S., Meyer, J. P., &amp; Topolnytsky, L. (2016). Are commitment profiles stable and predictable? A latent transition analysis. Journal of Management. Early View . http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206313503010 (in press).

Koestner, R., &amp; Losier, G. F. (2002). Distinguishing three ways of being internally motivated. In E. L. Deci, &amp; R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-determination research (pp. 101 -121). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester.

- Litalien, D., Guay, F., &amp; Morin, A. J. S. (2015). Motivation for PhD studies: Scale development and validation. Learning and Individual Differences , 41 , 1 -13.

- Liu, W., Wang, J., Tan, O., Koh, C., &amp; Ee, J. (2009). A self-determination approach to understanding students' motivation in project work. Learning and Individual Differences , 19 , 139 -145.
- Lubke, G., &amp; Muthén, B. O. (2007). Performance of factor mixture models as a function of model size, covariate effects, and class-specific parameters. Structural Equation Modeling , 14 , 26 -47.
- Marsh, H. W., Hau, K., &amp; Grayson, D. (2005). Goodness of fit in structural equation models. In A. Maydeu-Olivares, &amp; J. J. McArdle (Eds.), Contemporary psychometrics: A festschrift for Roderick P. McDonald (pp. 275 -340). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
- Marsh, H. W., Lüdtke, O., Nagengast, B., Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Von Davier, M. (2013). Why item parcels are (almost) never appropriate: Two wrongs do not make a right -Camouflaging misspecification with item parcels in CFA models. Psychological Methods , 18 , 257 -284.
- Marsh, H. W., Lüdtke, O., Trautwein, U., &amp; Morin, A. J. S. (2009). Classical latent profile analysis of academic self-concept dimensions: Synergy of person- and variablecentered approaches to theoretical models of self-concept. Structural Equation Modeling , 16 , 191 -225.

Maslach, C., Schaufeli, W. B., &amp; Leiter, M. P. (2001). Job burnout. Annual Review of Psychology , 52 , 397 -422.

McLachlan, G., &amp; Peel, D. (2000). Finite mixture models. New York: Wiley.

McNeill, M., &amp; Wang, C. K. J. (2005). Psychological profiles of elite sports players in Singapore. Psychology of Exercise and Sport , 6 , 117 -128.

- Meyer, J. P., &amp; Morin, A. J. S. (2016). A person-centered approach to commitment research: Theory, research, and methodology. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 37 , 584 -612.
- Meyer, J. P., Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Vandenberghe, C. (2015). Dual commitment to organization and supervisor: A person-centered approach. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 88 , 56 -72.
- Moran, M., Diefendorff, J., Kim, T., &amp; Liu, Z. (2012). A profile approach to self-determination theory motivations at work. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 81 , 354 -363. Morgan, G. B. (2015). Mixed mode latent class analysis: An examination of fit index performance for classification. Structural Equation Modeling , 22 , 76 -86.
- Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Marsh, H. W. (2015). Disentangling shape from level effects in person-centered analyses: An illustration based on university teachers' multidimensional profiles of effectiveness. Structural Equation Modeling , 22 , 39 -59.
- Morin, A. J. S., &amp; Wang, J. C. K. (2016). A gentle introduction to mixture modeling using physical fitness data. In N. Ntoumanis, &amp; N. Myers (Eds.), An introduction to intermediate and advanced statistical analyses for sport and exercise scientists (pp. 183 -210). London, UK: Wiley.
- Morin, A. J. S., Arens, A. K., &amp; Marsh, H. W. (2015). A bifactor exploratory structural equation modeling framework for the identification of distinct sources of construct-
- relevant psychometric multidimensionality. Structural Equation Modeling , 1 -24.
- Morin, A. J. S., Maïano, C., Nagengast, B., Marsh, H. W., Morizot, J., &amp; Janosz, M. (2011). Growth mixture modeling of adolescents trajectories of anxiety across adolescence: The impact of untested invariance assumptions. Structural Equation Modeling , 18 , 613 -648.
- Morin, A. J. S., Marsh, H. W., &amp; Nagengast, B. (2013). Chapter 10. Exploratory structural equation modeling. In G. R. Hancock, &amp; R. O. Mueller (Eds.), Structural equation modeling: A second course (2nd ed.). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing, Inc (2013).
- Morin, A. J. S., Meyer, J. P., Bélanger, É., Boudrias, J. -S., Gagné, M., &amp; Parker, P. D. (2016). Longitudinal associations between employees' perceptions of the quality of the change management process, affective commitment to change and empowerment. Human relations (In Press).
- Morin, A. J. S., Meyer, J. P., McInerney, D. M., Marsh, H. W., &amp; Ganotice, F. A., Jr. (2015). Profiles of dual commitment to the occupation and organization: Relations to wellbeing and turnover intentions. Asia Pacific Journal of Management , 32 , 717 -744.
- Morin, A. J. S., Morizot, J., Boudrias, J., &amp; Madore, I. (2011). A multifoci person-centered perspective on workplace affective commitment: A latent profile/factor mixture analysis. Organizational Research Methods , 14 , 58 -90.
- Morrison, E. W. (1994). Role definitions and organisational citizenship behaviour: The importance of the employee's perspective. Academy of Management Journal , 37 , 1543 -1567.
- Muthén, L. K., &amp; Muthén, B. O. (1998-2015). Mplus User's Guide (Seventh Edition ). Los Angeles, CA: Muthén &amp; Muthén.

Muthén, B. O. (2002). Beyond SEM: General latent variable modeling. Behaviormetrika , 29 , 81 -117.

- Muthén, B. O. (2003). Statistical and substantive checking in growth mixture modeling: Comment on Bauer and Curran (2003). Psychological Methods , 8 , 369 -377.
- Nylund, K. L., Asparouhov, T., &amp; Muthén, B. (2007). Deciding on the number of classes in latent class analysis and growth mixture modeling. A Monte Carlo simulation study. Structural Equation Modeling , 14 , 535 -569.
- Petras, H., &amp; Masyn, K. (2010). General growth mixture analysis with antecedents and consequences of change. In A. R. Piquero, &amp; D. Weisburd (Eds.), Handbook of quantitative criminology (pp. 69 -100). New York, NY: Springer.
- Peugh, J., &amp; Fan, X. (2012). How well does growth mixture modeling identify heterogenous growth trajectories? A simulation study examining GMM's performance characteristics. Structural Equation Modeling , 19 , 204 -226.
- Peugh, J., &amp; Fan, X. (2013). Modeling unobserved heterogeneity using latent profile analysis: A Monte Carlo simulation. Structural Equation Modeling , 20 , 616 -639. Peugh, J., &amp; Fan, X. (2015). Enumeration index performance in generalized growth mixture models: A Monte Carlo test of Muthén's (2003) hypothesis. Structural Equation Modeling , 22 , 115 -131.

Pinder, C. C. (1998). Motivation in work organizations. NJ: Upper Saddle River.

- Ratelle, C., Guay, F., Vallerand, R., Larose, S., &amp; Senécal, C. (2007). Autonomous, controlled, and amotivated types of academic motivation: A person-oriented analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology , 99 , 734 -746.
- Raykov, T., &amp; Marcoulides, G. A. (2004). Using the delta method for approximate interval estimation of parameter functions in SEM. Structural Equation Modeling , 11 , 621 -637.
- Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., &amp; Grolnick, W. S. (1995). Autonomy, relatedness, and the self: Their relation to development and psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti, &amp; D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology: Theory and methods , vol. 1 . (pp. 618 -655). New York: Wiley.
- Sass, D. A., &amp; Schmitt, T. A. (2010). A comparative investigation of rotation criteria within exploratory factor analysis. Multivariate Behavioral Research , 45 , 73 -103.

Schaufeli, W. B., &amp; Bakker, A. B. (2003). UWES-Utrecht Work Engagement Scale: test manual. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, Utrecht University.

Schaufeli, W. B., &amp; van Dierendonck, D. (1993). The construct validity of two burnout measures.

Journal of Organizational Behavior

,

14

, 631

-

647.

- Schmitt, T. A., &amp; Sass, D. A. (2011). Rotation criteria and hypothesis testing for exploratory factor analysis: Implications for factor pattern loadings and interfactor correlations. Educational and Psychological Measurement , 71 , 95 -113.

Skrondal, A., &amp; Laake, P. (2001). Regression among factor scores. Psychometrika , 66 , 563 -576.

- Solinger, O. N., Van Olffen, W., Roe, R. A., &amp; Hofmans, J. (2013). On becoming (un)committed: A taxonomy and test of newcomer onboarding scenarios. Organization Science , 24 , 1640 -1661.

Tein, J. -Y., Coxe, S., &amp; Cham, H. (2013). Statistical power to detect the correct number of classes in latent profile analysis.

Tofighi, D., &amp; Enders, C. K. (2008). Identifying the correct number of classes in growth mixture models. In mixture models

(pp. 317

-

341). Information Age: Charlotte, NC.

Tolvanen, A. (2007). Latent growth mixture modeling: A simulation study. (PhD dissertation) Department of Mathematics, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.

Tremblay, M. A., Blanchard, C. M., Taylor, S., Pelletier, L. G., &amp; Villeneuve, M. (2009). Work extrinsic and intrinsic motivation scale: Its value for organizational psychology research. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne des sciences du comportement , 41 (4), 213.

Van den Broeck, A., De Cuyper, N., De Witte, H., &amp; Vansteenkiste, M. (2010). Not all job demands are equal: Differentiating job hindrances and job challenges in the job demands -resources model. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 19 (6), 735 -759.

Van den Broeck, A., Lens, W., De Witte, H., &amp; Van Coillie, H. (2013). Unraveling the importance of the quantity and the quality of workers' motivation for wellbeing: A person-centered perspective. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 82 , 69 -78.

Vansteenkiste, M., Sierens, E., Soenens, B., Luyck, K., &amp; Lens, W. (2009). Motivational profiles from a self-determination perspective: The quality of motivation matters. Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 671 -688.

Vermunt, J. K., &amp; Magidson, J. (2002). Latent class cluster analysis. In J. Hagenaars, &amp; A. McCutcheon (Eds.), Applied latent class models (pp. 89 -106). New York: Cambridge.

Yang, C. (2006). Evaluating latent class analyses in qualitative phenotype identification. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis , 50 , 1090 -1104.

Zyphur, M. J. (2009). When mindsets collide: Switching analytical mindsets to advance organizational science. Academy of Management Review , 34 , 677 -688.

Structural Equation Modeling

G. R. H., &amp; K. M. Samuelsen (Eds.),

,

20

, 640

-

657.

Advances in latent variable