<!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Aner Govrin,

Bar-Ilan University, Israel

## Reviewed by:

Patrick Connolly, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, Hong Kong, SAR China Daniela Flores Mosri, Universidad Intercontinental, Mexico Heinz Boeker, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Vida Demarin,

International Institute for Brain Health, Croatia

## *Correspondence:

Georg Northoff georg.northoff@theroyal.ca Andrea Scalabrini andrea.scalabrini@unich.it

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Psychology for Clinical Settings, a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology

Received:

30 May 2021

Accepted:

13 September 2021

Published:

14 October 2021

## Citation:

Northoff G and Scalabrini A (2021) 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' - Brain and Psyche Share Their Topography and Dynamic.

Front. Psychol. 12:717402. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.717402

<!-- image -->

## 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' - Brain and Psyche Share Their Topography and Dynamic

Georg Northoff 1,2,3 * and Andrea Scalabrini 4 *

1   Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Neural Dynamics, The Royal's Institute of Mental Health Research, Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada,  2 Mental Health Centre, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China,  3   Centre for Cognition and Brain Disorders, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China,  4   Department of Psychological, Health and Territorial Sciences (DiSPuTer), D'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy

What kind of neuroscience does psychoanalysis require? At his time, Freud in his 'Project for a Scientific Psychology' searched for a model of the brain that could relate to incorporate the psyche's topography and dynamic. Current neuropsychoanalysis builds on specific functions as investigated in Affective and Cognitive (and Social) Neuroscience including embodied approaches. The brain's various functions are often converged with prediction as operationalized in predictive coding (PC) and free energy principle (FEP) which, recently, have been conceived as core for a 'New Project for Scientific Psychology.' We propose to search for a yet more comprehensive and holistic neuroscience that focuses primarily on its topography and dynamic analogous to Freud's model of the psyche. This leads us to what we describe as 'Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' that focuses on the spatial topography and temporal dynamic of the brain's neural activity including how they shape affective, cognitive, and social functions including PC and FEP ( first part ). That is illustrated by the temporally and spatially nested neural hierarchy of the self in the brain's neural activity ( second and third part ). This sets the ground for developing our proposed 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience,' which complements and extends both Freud's and Solms' projects ( fourth part ) and also carries major practical implications as it lays the ground  for  a  novel  form  of  neuroscientifically  informed  psychotherapy,  namely, 'Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy.' In conclusion, 'Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' provides an intimate link of brain and psyche by showing topography and dynamic as their shared features, that is, 'common currency.'

Keywords: spatiotemporal neuroscience, neuropsychoanalysis, self, psychotherapy, spontaneous activity of the brain, common currency, brain and psyche

'Every attempt to discover a localization of mental processes … has miscarried completely. The same fate would await any theory that attempted to recognize the anatomical position of the system (consciousness) - as being in the cortex, and to localize the unconscious processes in the subcortical parts of the brain. There is a hiatus which at present cannot be filled, nor is it one of the tasks of psychology to fill it. Our psychical topography has for the present nothing to do with anatomy. ' ~ Freud, 1915.

## INTRODUCTION

How can we link psychoanalysis to neuroscience? Freud himself tried  to  connect  psychoanalysis  and  neuroscience  in  his  early writing  'Project  of  a  Scientific  Psychology'  (1895).  However, in  the  following,  he  gave  up  on  such  project  focusing  mainly on  the  development  of  psychoanalysis.  These  efforts  flare  up again our time including various clusters of recent neuroscientific research  (Boeker,  2018).  One  cluster  is  the  ' embodied  brain hypothesis' that  conceives  cognitive  and  affective  functions  of the brain to be closely linked to the body and its interoceptive functions. This has led to concepts like ' embodied remembering, ' ' embodied unconscious, ' ' embodied memories, ' ' embodied feelings, ' and ' embodied testimony ' (Edelman, 1987, 1989, 1992; Northoff, 2011, 2012a; Leuzinger-Bohleber, 2018; Mucci, 2019).

Yet another cluster of neuroscientific research is the dynamic neuropsychology  by  AR.  Luria  that,  through  Solms'  clinicalanatomical  localization  approach  to  psychodynamic  features, provides  one  link  of  brain  and  psyche.  Moreover,  in  addition to Cognitive Neuroscience, the development of Affective Neuroscience  by  especially  Jaak  Panksepp  (1998)  represents another  cluster  where  primary  and  secondary  emotions  are linked  to  primary  and  secondary  processes  (Panksepp  and Biven,  2012;  Solms,  2015).  Finally,  yet  another  more  recent cluster  is  developed  by  Mark  Solms  when  he  aims  to  link  the free  energy  and  predictive  coding  approach  by  Karl  Friston to  psychoanalysis:  He  considers  the  biologically  and  physically defined concepts of free energy and predictive coding to reflect what  Freud  referred  to  as  mental  or  psychical  energy  (Solms and Friston, 2018; Solms, 2020, 2021). That, according to Solms, provides the key connection of brain and psyche as core feature of a 'New Project for a Scientific Psychology' (Solms, 2020, 2021).

Despite  all  progress,  neuroscientific  approaches  adhere  to a scientific psychology that, as traditionally conceived, is based on  specific  functions  and  the  third-person  perspective.  Just  as the  psyche  in  psychology,  the  brain  is  conceived  in  terms  of specific functions showing extrinsic contents, affective, cognitive, or  social:  these  are  localized  in  particular  regions  of  the  brain, remain  the  same  over  time  and  are  investigated  by  probing the  brain's  task-related  activity.  As  in  the  case  of  the  psyche in  psychology,  this  amounts  largely  to  a  non-energetic,  mostly static, content-based, and third-person-based view of the brain.

Psychoanalysis,  in  both  its  original  inception  and  current manifestations, contends such view of the psyche as presupposed in psychology. Instead, the psyche is conceived as highly energetic (like cathexis) rather than non-energetic, it is continuously  changing,  and  thus,  dynamic  rather  than  static exhibits  a  structure  or  organization  that  shapes  its  contents and aims for a first- or second- rather than third-person-based view of the psyche (e.g., Northoff et al., 2007; Schilbach, 2010; Przyrembel et al.,  2012;  Longo  and  Tsakiris,  2013).  This  leaves a  gap,  a  'gap  of  contingency'  ( see  below ),  when  compared  to the  current  view  of  the  brain  in  neuroscience.  The  energetic, dynamic,  structural/organizational,  and  first/s-person  features of  the  psyche  in  psychoanalysis  are  related  to  a  brain  that  is non-energetic,  static,  content-based,  and  third-person-based. Such mismatch between the models of psyche (in psychoanalysis)

and  brain  (in  affective,  cognitive,  and  social  neuroscience) renders impossible to take into view their intimate connection, that  is,  how  neural  activity  transforms  into  psychic  activity. Our  view  of  brain-psyche  is  consequently  blocked  by  a  gap with their connection remaining contingent (rather than necessary a  posteriori ;  Northoff,  2018)  -  we  will  therefore  speak  later of  a  'gap  of  contingency. '  (see  the  dotted  lines  and  black  lines in Figure  1 and  the  black  arrow  in Figure  2 as  below).

How  can  we  close  the  'gap  of  contingency'  between  brain and  psyche?  One  way  is  to  take  into  view  the  brain  in  terms that are analogous to the model of the psyche in psychoanalysis. Specifically,  one  may  want  to  conceive  the  brain  in  terms  of its  energy,  dynamic,  structure/topography,  and  first/s-person perspective. Brain and psyche can then be conceived in analogous terms  with  the  ultimate  hope  that  these  features  are  shared by  brain  and  psyche  as  their  'common  currency'  (Northoff et  al.,  2020a).  Importantly,  that  should  close  the  current  'gap of  contingency'  between  brain  and  psyche  allowing  for  their tighter  connection  (i.e.,  necessary a  posteriori ;  Northoff,  2018) as  searched  for  by  both  Freud  and  Solms  in  their  respective projects  for  a  scientific  psychology.

The goal of our paper is to develop the kind of neuroscience that  is  necessary  to  intimately  connect  brain  and  psyche  in order  to  complete  Freud's  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology' (1895). Rather than relying on the characterization of the brain as  in  current  Cognitive and Affective and Social Neuroscience, we  propose  taking  an  alternative  view,  one  that  focuses  on the brain's energy, dynamic, structure, and conceives it in first/ second-person  perspective.  Specifically,  we  aim  to  develop  a more  comprehensive  and  holistic  model  of  the  brain  in  terms of its intrinsic temporal dynamic and spatial topography - this requires 'Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' (Northoff et al., 2020a,b; first  part ).  That  approach  will  be  illustrated  empirically  by  the example  of  the  self  featured  by  its  topography  ( second  part ) and  dynamic  ( third  part )  in  brain  and  psyche.

Spatiotemporal Neuroscience carries major theoretical implications  for  the  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  by  both Freud  (1895)  and  Solms  (2020).  Additionally,  it  carries  major practical  implications  as  it  lays  the  ground  for  a  novel  form  of neuroscientifically informed psychotherapy, namely 'Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy'  ( fourth  part ).  We  conclude  that  'Spatiotemporal Neuroscience'  provides  a  strong  candidate  for  complementing Freud's  unfinished  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  (1895) including its most recent version of a '(New) Project for a Scientific Psychology'  by  Mark  Solms  (2020,  2021).  We  therefore  speak  of a  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience. '

## PART  I:  PSYCHOANALYSIS  AND NEUROSCIENCE  -  VIEWS  OF  PSYCHE AND  BRAIN

## Psyche in Psychoanalysis - Dynamic, Topographic, and Spatiotemporal

One of Freud's key observations was that the psyche is dynamic, that  is,  it  changes  over  time  with  the  changes  following  a

FIGURE 1  | Different models of the psyche in psychoanalysis (upper) and the brain in current neuroscience (lower) with red dotted lines indicating insufficient contingent connection, that is, 'gap of contingency.'

<!-- image -->

certain pattern that establish a particular structure or organization.  The  emphasis  on  the  dynamics  of  the  psyche is  well  reflected  in  his  notion  of  mental  or  psychic  energy, that  is,  cathexis,  that  fuels  drives,  libido,  instinct,  and  the dynamic  unconscious  where  cathexis  remains  unconstrained. This  mental  energy  is  key  in  structuring  and  organizing  the psyche in a dynamic  way. That is reflected in his first topographical  model  of  the  unconscious-conscious  as  well  as in  his  second  topographical  model  of  the  three-fold  relation of Id , Ego ,  and Super-ego .

Freud  aimed  to  decipher  a  deeper  and  more  fundamental layer  of  the  psyche  beneath  its  functions  and  contents  when focusing  on  its  dynamic  and  topography.  How,  though,  can we describe dynamic and topography of the psyche independent and  prior of their functions and  contents? Freud  himself emphasizes  the  spatial  and  temporal  features  of  the  psyche -  we  may  require  a  spatiotemporal  approach  complementing the  affective  and/or  cognitive  approach  to  the  psyche.  This  is well  reflected  in  the  following  quote  by  Freud  himself.

' Accordingly, we will picture the mental apparatus as a compound  instrument,  to  the  components  of  which  we  will  give the name of 'agencies', or (for the sake of greater clarity) 'systems'. It  is  to  be  anticipated,  in  the  next  place,  that  these  systems may perhaps  stand  in  a  regular spatial relation  to  one  another, in  the  same  kind  of  way  in  which  the  various  systems  of  lenses in a telescope are arranged behind one another. Strictly speaking, there  is  no  need  for  the  hypothesis  that  the  psychical  systems are  actually  arranged  in  a  spatial  order.  It  would  be  sufficient if  a  fixed  order  were  established  by  the  fact  that  in  a  given psychical  process  the  excitation  passes  through  the  systems  in  a particular temporal sequence.  In  other  processes  the  sequence may perhaps be a different one; that is a possibility that we shall leave  open.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  we  will  in  future  speak  of the  components  of  the  apparatus  as  ' ψ -systems'' (Freud  1900, p.  535; bolds  by  us ).

## Psyche in Psychology - Static, Modular, and Non-spatiotemporal

The  conception  of  the  psyche  in  psychoanalysis  by  dynamic, topography,  and  spatiotemporal  features  stands  in  contrast  to the  view  of  the  static  view  of  the  psyche.  The  psyche  is  often

FIGURE 2  | Views of psyche and brain in psychology, psychoanalysis, and different forms of neuroscience. Arrows indicate the combination of the models of the psyche in Psychology and Psychoanalysis with the model of brain as in Cognitive/Affective Neuroscience (green arrow, black arrow) as well as of psychoanalysis with Spatiotemporal Neuroscience (orrange arrow). Red lines (on the black arrow) indicate the mismatch between the models of psyche (in psychoanalysis) and brain (in Coginitive/Affective Neurosscience).

<!-- image -->

conceived  as  collection  of  functions  in  terms  of  modules  that are  merely  added  together,  standing  side-by-side  in  parallel. For instance, different memory systems (like working memory, semantic, and episodic memory) and distinct emotions or form of  attention  are  distinguished  from  each  other  operating  more or  less  independently  or  in  a  modular  way.  Accordingly,  there is no  assumption  of  an  overall psychic structure, that is, topography encompassing all functions in an organized whole.

Moreover,  the  various  psychological  functions  are  considered to  be  stable  and  non-changing  thus  being  static  -  the  dynamic beneath  the  functions  is  thus  often  neglected.  Together,  this amounts  to  a  view  of  the  psyche  in  psychology  in  terms  of functions  and  their  contents  while  their  underlying  spatial  and temporal  features  are  neglected.  This  stands  in  contrast  to  the view of the psyche in psychoanalysis where spatial and temporal features are assumed to shape and constitute the psyche ( see above ).

Finally,  there  is  also  a  methodological  difference  between psychoanalysis  and  psychology  regarding  first/second  vs. third-person perspective. Psychoanalysis requires first/second person reports with subjective experience for understanding the  dynamic  manifestations  of  psychic  energy  as  well  as the structure of conscious-unconscious and Id-Ego-Super-Ego , that is, their topography. That stands in contrast to psychology. Here,  the  focus  is  on  objective  observation  in  third-person perspective as to eclipse and exclude any traces of subjective first/second  perspective.  Even  stronger,  first/second  person experience is often criticized as non-scientific in conventional psychology  that  focuses  strictly  on  third-person  perspective to  acquire  data.  Hence,  the  dynamic  vs.  static  approach  to the psyche stand in opposition and are exclusive on methodological grounds. This makes urgent a more cohomprensive  and  holistic  approach.

## View of the Brain in Cognitive, Affective, and Social Neuroscience - Static, Regional Modular, and Non-spatiotemporal

Neuroscience and its different branches like cognitive, affective, social,  and  cultural  (just  to  name  a  few)  are  developed  largely as  extension  of  the  respective  branches  in  psychology.  This means that  the  static,  modular,  non-spatial  and  non-temporal, and  third-person-based  view  of  the  psyche  is  more  or  less transferred  to  the  brain  itself.

Particular  cognitive  or  affective  functions  are  associated  with specific  brain  regions  whose  neural  activity,  as  related  to  these functions, is  conceived non-changing, that is, static, and modular, that  is,  localized  in  specific  brain  regions  (like  the  localization  of primary and secondary emotions in distinct subcortical and cortical regions;  Panksepp,  1998).  The  brain  itself  and  its  neural  activity are consequently conceived as static, modular, non-spatiotemporal, and third-person-based. This view of the brain, although necessary for the discover of brain-related functions and contents, predominates in  current  Cognitive  and  Affective  Neuroscience  (and  related branches  like  Social  and  Cultural  Neuroscience)  and  lacks  of  a more  holistic  and  comprehensive  approach.

The  primacy  of  functions  and  contents  goes  along  with  a focus  on  task-related  activity  that  measures  the  impact  of  the former on the brain's neural activity. Analogously to the functions themselves,  task-related  activity  is  then  also  considered  in  a static  and  regional  modular  way  independent  of  potentially underlying spatial and temporal features. Taken together, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience (and their various siblings) considers  the  brain  and  its  task-related  activity  in  more  or less  the  same  terms  as  the  psyche  is  viewed  in  psychology.

Given such analogy in  their  characterization,  the  brain  and their task-related activity are supposed to account for the psyche

thus  bridging  the  gap  between  neuroscience  and  psychology (see  green  arrow  in Figure  2 ).  In  contrast,  such  view  of  the brain  does  not  bridge  the  gap  to  the  view  of  the  psyche  in psychoanalysis as that is dynamic, topographic, and spatiotemporal rather than static, modular, and non-spatiotemporal (see black arrow with red bars in Figure 2 ).

## 'Common Currency' - Temporal Dynamic and Spatial Topography Are Shared by Brain and Psyche

How can Cognitive, Social, and Affective Neuroscience account for the psychodynamic view of the psyche? The various clusters of  their  connection  pointed  out  in  the  introduction  cannot but  suffer  from  a  fundamental  discrepancy  between  brain  and psyche.  They  all  aim  to  connect  a  static,  regional  modular, and  non-spatiotemporal  brain,  featured  by  its  extrinsic  taskrelated activity, with a dynamic, topographic, and spatiotemporal psyche characterized by its  intrinsic  spontaneity.  The  only  way to  remedy  this  discrepancy  is  to  view  the  brain  in  a  way  that is  analogous  to  the  psyche  in  psychoanalysis.  The  brain  and its  neural  activity  may  thus  need  to  be  conceived  as  dynamic, topographic,  and  spatiotemporal  -  this  is  the  aim  of  what recently has been introduced as 'Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' (Northoff  et  al.,  2020a,b).

One  key  feature  of  the  brain  is  its  spontaneous  activity that  refers  to  the  absence  of  specific  tasks  or  stimuli  as  it  can be  measured  during  the  resting  state  (Logothetis  et  al.,  2009; Raichle, 2009, 2010; Northoff, 2012b, 2014a,b, 2018). The spontaneous  activity  can  be  characterized  topographically  by various interacting networks like default-mode network, salience network,  and  central  executive  network,  whose  relationships seem  to  be  modulated  by  the  brain's  global  activity,  that  is, global  signal  topography  (Tanabe  et  al.,  2020;  Zhang  et  al., 2020;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2020a).  While  on  the  temporal  side, the brain's spontaneous activity is characterized by fluctuations or oscillations in various frequency ranges ( see below for details ) that,  together,  provide  a  certain  temporal  dynamic  structure (Buzsaki,  2006;  He,  2014;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2017;  Northoff, 2018;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2019).

The  spontaneous  activity  itself  has  recently  been  associated with various internally oriented cognitive functions like mindwandering  (Smallwood  and  Schooler,  2015;  Christoff  et  al., 2016; Northoff, 2018), mental time travel or episodic simulation (Schacter et al., 2012; Northoff, 2017), autobiographical memory, and  self-referential  processing  (Northoff  et  al.,  2006;  Northoff, 2016). Hence, the spatial topography of the spontaneous activity may itself be related to different forms of cognition (Smallwood et  al.,  2021;  Y eshurun  et  al.,  2021).  This  leaves  open  how  the spontaneous activity mediates such cognitive (and also affective and social) functions during both resting state and task-related activity,  though.  Addressing  this  question  is  key  in  providing an  intimate  connection  of  brain  and  cognition/emotion,  that is,  of  neural  and  psychological  activity  and  hence  of  brain and  psyche.

We  postulate that, in order to provide such intimate connection,  brain  and  psyche  must  share  some  features,  a

'common currency' (Northoff et al., 2020a,b). Freud's topography  and  dynamic  of  the  psyche  entails  a  spatial  and temporal view of the psyche: the temporal and spatial organization  and  structure  of  the  psyche  shapes  its  contents and  functions.  Relying  on  Freud  and  our  spatiotemporal characterization  of  the  brain's  spontaneous  activity,  we  now propose  that  spatial  topography  and  temporal  dynamic  are shared  by  both  neural  and  psychical  activity.  What  Freud described  as  mental  topography  and  dynamic  of  the  psyche characterizes also, in more or less analogous ways, the brain's neural  activity  including  both  spontaneous  and  task-related activity.  Spatial  topography  and  temporal  dynamic  are  thus shared  as  'common  currency'  of  brain  and  psyche  (Northoff et  al.,  2020a,b).

## View of the Brain in Spatiotemporal Neuroscience - Dynamic, Topographic, and Spatiotemporal

We  are  now  ready  to  determine  what  we  recently  introduced as  'Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  (Northoff  et  al.,  2020a,b). As  explicated  above,  Cognitive,  Affective,  Social  and  Cultural Neuroscience largely view the brain as static, regional modular, and  non-spatiotemporal.  This  contrasts  with  Spatiotemporal Neuroscience that conceives the brain's neural activity (including both spontaneous and task-related activity) largely in dynamic, topographic,  and  spatiotemporal  terms.

Rather  than  on  the  neural  activity  of  affective,  cognitive, etc. functions and contents themselves, the focus in Spatiotemporal Neuroscience is on the spatial topography and temporal dynamic of their neural activity during both internally and externally oriented cognition. Spatiotemporal Neuroscience thus conceives both the brain's neural activity and the psyche's mental activity primarily in spatial topographic and temporal dynamic terms: It focuses on the brain's spatial and temporal features  that  constitute  its  dynamic  and  topography,  and  how they, in turn, shape  cognitive, affective, and  social brain function  including  their  respective  contents.  This  makes  it clear that Spatiotemporal Neuroscience neither stands contradictory  to  nor  is  exclusive  with  Affective,  Cognitive, and  Social  Neuroscience.  Instead,  the  former  integrates  and embeds  the  letter  in  a  broader  more  comprehensive  spatial and  temporal  context,  that  is,  topography  and  dynamic  (see Figure  3 ).

The same also applies to predictive coding and free energy. Spatiotemporal Neuroscience provides the spatial topographic and temporal dynamic context within which predictive coding and  free  energy  operate;  they  provide  what  has  been  called 'deep  temporal  model'  (Kiebel  et  al.,  2008;  Friston  et  al., 2017)  or  'temporal  thickness'  (Seth,  2015).  Spatiotemporal Neuroscience focuses primarily on the dynamic and topographical features that for instance characterize free energy (Friston et al., 2015), that indeed has been demonstrated to  be  scale-free  and  operates  at  multiple  nested  spatial  scale and  timescale.  The  same  applies  to  the  link  of  first  and third person. Spatiotemporal Neuroscience takes into consideration  first-person  experience  of  mental  features  and

<!-- image -->

links  them  to  third-person  observation  about  the  brain  this  link  is  made  possible  through  spatiotemporal  features being shared by both first and third person as their 'common currency.'  This  shall  now  be  demonstrated  by  the  example of  self  whose  topography  ( second  part )  and  dynamic  ( third ) in both  its psyche  and  brain  are  discussed  in  the next two  parts.

## PART  II:  SPATIAL  TOPOGRAPHY  NESTEDNESS  AS  'COMMON CURRENCY'  OF  SELF  AND  BRAIN

## Topography of the Brain - Spatial Layers and Nested Hierarchy

Topography refers to a particular spatial organization or structure of  brain  and  psyche.  One  key  feature  of  their  topography  is hierarchies. Hierarchies have been postulated in both neuroscience  and  psychoanalysis.  They  may  thus  offer  insight into  the  intimate  connection  of,  for  instance,  brain  and  self. The  English  neurologist  Hughling  Jackson  early  on  proposed a  three-layer  hierarchy  of  the  brain  with  lower,  middle,  and higher centers that were assumed to be associated with different regions  and  psychological  functions  (see  Wiest,  2012  for  an overview). More recently, MacLean (1990) and Panksepp (1998, 2012)  conceived  the  brain's  subcortical-cortical  organization in terms of a radial-concentric pattern and associated its different layers  different  levels  of  emotions  (like  primary,  secondary, and  tertiary  emotions).  Panksepp  (1998)  and  Damasio  (2010) associated  such  hierarchy  of  the  brain  with  different  concepts of  self,  like  bodily  self,  autobiographical  self,  and  extended self.  A  more  radial-concentric  approach  to  the  brain  is  the three-layer  anatomical  model  of  the  brain  as  proposed  by Feinberg  and  Northoff  (Northoff  et  al.,  2011).  We  will  see that,  together  with  the  recent  data,  this  supports  the  idea  of a  spatially  nested  hierarchy  of  self  based  on  the  brain's  radialconcentric  organization.

A  clearly  hierarchical  organization  of  self  (which  we  here use in a broader sense) which embeds and contains the concept of  ego  has  also  been  proposed  in  psychoanalysis  by  Freud. Strachey (1961) and Kernberg (1984) noted how Freud preserved the German Ich - Ego as a mental structure and psychic agency but  also  as  the  subjective  experiential  self  in  all  his  writing. In  synthesis,  Strachey  and  Kernberg  propose  that  Freud  never dissociated the Ich - Ego from the experiencing self. Moreover, Freud suggested the Id to  be the lowest level of the topography of the psyche that remains essentially unconscious but nevertheless  strongly  influences  the  upper  levels  of  the Ego and  the Super-ego .

Together,  this  amounts  to  a  nested  hierarchy  of  self  where the  lower  layer  somewhat  re-surfaces  within  the  next  upper layer  and  so  forth  (see  also  Wiest,  2012).  While  Freud's  rigid three-layer  partition  was  criticized  later  by  others,  the  multifacedness  of  self  with  its  sense  of  subjectivity  permeating across  bodily,  affective,  and  cognitive  layers  remains  a  key feature  in  both  neuroscience  and  psychoanalysis.  We  will demonstrate  that  the  model  of  a  nested  hierarchy  of  self  is strongly  supported  by  recent  neuroscience  in  both  its  spatial and  temporal  aspects  -  therefore,  we  characterize  the  neural (and psychological) hierarchy of self by spatial and temporal  nestedness.

## From the Brain's Topography to the Self Three Input Layers (Interoceptive, ExteroProprioceptive, Mental)

A  recent  large-scale  meta-analysis  in  healthy  subjects  by  Qin et al. (2020) investigated and analyzed different imaging studies that focused on different aspects of self, inner body (interoceptive), outer body (extero-proprioceptive), and the own cognitive  or  mental  states.  They  observed  different  regions  to be  associated  with  each  of  the  three  layers;  at  the  same  time, there  was  regional  overlap  as  the  regions  of  the  lower  layer were included within the next upper layer ( see below for details ). Together, this amounts to a spatial multi-layered nested hierarchical  model  of  self  (Qin  et  al.,  2020)  including  (1) interoceptive self (2) extero-proprioceptive self, and (3) mental self  ( Figure  4 ).

The  interoceptive  self,  that  is,  how  the  brain  processes  and perceive the body's inner organs and their input, was investigated through fMRI task studies that measured interoceptive awareness of the own body including cardiorespiratory awareness, urogenital, and  gastrointestinal  awareness.  That  was  complemented  by extero-proprioceptive  self  fMRI  studies  focusing  on  external bodily  inputs  like  facial  or  proprioceptive  inputs  connected  to the self. Finally, they also included the 'typical' more cognitive mental  self  fMRI  studies  employing  trait  adjectives  or  other stimuli  where  subjects  have  to  become  aware  of  their  own self  as  distinct  from  others.

Based  on  the  interoceptive  studies,  there  is  a  most  basic or  lower  layer  of  self,  an  interoceptive  self  that  is  related  to regions  that  mostly  process  interoceptive  stimuli  from  the own  body,  that  is,  bilateral  insula,  dorsal  anterior  cingulate cortex, thalamus, and parahippocampus thus including mainly regions  of  the  salience  network  (Menon,  2011;  Qin  et  al., 2020).  The  fact  that  these  regions  were  shared  among  the different kinds of interoceptive awareness, that is, cardiorespiratory, urogenital, and gastrointestinal, suggests that these  regions  are  key  in  integrating  different  interoceptive inputs  of  the  various  organs  of  the  inner  body  (Craig,  2003, 2010).  One  can  thus  speak  of  an 'interoceptive  or  vegetative self ' (Babo-Rebelo  et  al.,  2016,  2019),  ' bodily  self '  (Tsakiris, 2017),  ' proto-self '  (Damasio,  2010),  or  ' SELF '  (Panksepp, 1998)  as  most  basic  and  fundamental  layer  of  self.  Following particularly  Panksepp  (1998),  the  SELF  provides  a  complex network  infrastructure  where  all  basic  emotional  operating systems  converge  on  primitive  brain  regions  such  as  the thalamus  and  the  periaqueductal  gray  (PAG).  This  network is  similar  across  all  mammalian  species  and  represents  the interoceptive and thus affective foundation of SELF  and necessary for the construction of higher levels of self (Northoff and  Panksepp,  2008).  This  is  in  line  with  the  interoceptive level  of  self-processing  proposed  by  Qin  et  al.  (2020)  that is  considered  the  ground  level  of  the  hierarchy.

The  next  or  middle  layer  of  self  includes  what  Qin  et  al. (2020)  describe  as  proprioceptive  or  exteroceptive  self;  the fMRI  studies  focusing  on  external  bodily-related  inputs  like facial  or  proprioceptive  inputs  yielded  regions  like  bilateral insula, interior frontal gyrus, premotor cortex, temporo-parietal junction  (TPJ),  and  medial  prefrontal  cortex.  As  these  regions process  inputs  from  different  sensory  modalities,  they  may be key  in not only integrating  extero-  and  proprioceptive modalities  but  also  different  exteroceptive  sensory  modalities, that is, cross-modal integration. Despite their differences, these regions  share  the  processing  of  proprioceptive  inputs  related to  the  own  body  -  one  can  thus  speak  of  a  ' proprio-  or extero-ceptive self, or embodied self' (Panksepp, 1998; Gallagher, 2005;  Damasio,  2010;  Tsakiris,  2017).

Finally,  the  most  upper  layer  of  self  (Qin  et  al.,  2020)  is based  on  fMRI  studies  that  yielded  typical  DMN  midline regions  like  medial  prefrontal  cortex  and  posterior  cingulate cortex  as  well  as  the  regions  included  in  the  second  level, most  notably  bilateral  TPJ,  and  first  level,  bilateral  insula  and thalamus.  These  regions  seem  to  be  recruited  when  on  needs represent  one's  own  self  in  mental  states  -  one  can  therefore also  speak  of  a 'mental  or  cognitive  self' (Qin  et  al.,  2020) or  ' extended  self '  (Damasio,  2010).

Together,  these  findings  suggest  what  Qin  et  al.  (2020) describe  as  'nested  hierarchy  of  self ':  Regions  of  the  lower level  were  included  in  the  next  higher  level  where  they  were complemented by additional regions and so forth. For instance, bilateral  insula  was  present  on  the  most  basic  level,  that  is, the interoceptive self and resurfaced (in completely independent imaging  studies) again in both second, that is, proprioexteroceptive,  and  third,  that  is,  mental  self,  levels.  The  same hold true for the bilateral TPJ  that first showed  in  the intermediate layer of the proprioceptive self and re-resurfaced again  in  the  third  level  of  the  mental  self.  Accordingly,  each of  the  hierarchical  levels  of  self  recruits  both  overlapping and  separate  regions  compared  to  other  levels  amounting  to spatial  nestedness  with  a  spatially  nested  hierarchy  of  self ( Figure  4 ).

## Spatial Topography of Self - Tripartite Structure of Ego Vs. Different Input Layers of Self

The  constitution  of  the  nested  hierarchy  of  self  by  the  brain provides  close  connection  to  psychoanalysis.  We  here  refrain from associating the spatial topographical findings of the brain with  the  tripartite  psychodynamic  topography  proposed  by Freud  (since  it  might  be  rather  too  speculative  and  unprecise; see Figure 5 ).  Instead,  we  pursue another more empirical path

FIGURE 4  | Nested hierarchy of self in the brain with different regional layers of brain activity (black boxes on the left and upper middle) nesting in their regions within each other (brown, green and blue boxes on the right) resulting in a corresponding nestedness of different layers of self (brown, green, and blue circles in the middle).

<!-- image -->

where the empirical data are converged with a more relational model  of  self.

We  have  seen  that  all  three  layers  of  self,  interoceptive, proprio-exteroceptive,  and  cognitive  mental,  are  based  on  the respective  inputs  from  the  inner  body,  the  outer  body,  and the  cognitive  (and  ultimately  neuronal)  input  from  within  the brain  itself.  The  self,  operationalized  as  a  whole  subjective experience  at  different  nested  levels  and  different  from  the ego  described  by  Freud,  is  here  operationalized  in  terms  of its  input  processing,  that  is,  how  it  processes  and  relates  to the  distinct  types  of  inputs,  that  is,  interoceptive,  proprioexteroceptive,  and  cognitive  mental.

Importantly,  the  self  is  here  no  longer  conceived  conceived as  an  isolated  entity  that  'resides'  inside  the  inner  regions and  structures  of  brain,  body,  and  mind.  Instead,  the  self  is constituted  by  processes  that  reach  beyond  the  boundaries  of brain,  body,  and  mind  to  the  external  world  by  taking  on different degrees of expansion, that is, self-expansion (Northoff, 2016;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2018).

First,  the  self  is  constituted  by  integrating  the  different interoceptive inputs from within the inner body -the interoceptive  self.  Second,  these  processes  expand  beyond the inner body  by  reaching  out  to  the outer body,  the proprio-  or  exteroceptive  self.  Third,  these  processes  extend beyond  the  outer  body  to  the  brain  and  its  cognitive  input - this is the mental or cognitive self. While targeting distinct inputs,  these  processes  constitute  a  sense  of  self  that  reaches beyond  the  boundaries  of  brain,  body,  and  environment: They,  as  we  will  lay  out  below,  constitute  a  virtual  threedimensional spatial structure that integrates brain, body, and environment  by  nesting  them  within  each  other,  that  is, spatial  nestedness.

## Topography of Brain and Psyche - Spatial Nestedness as 'Common Currency' of Brain and Self

We  take  the  self  as  paradigmatic  instance  about  the  relation of  brain  and  psyche.  Specifically,  we  demonstrate  how  the topography of the brain constitutes a particular spatial structure or organization across all of its regions/networks. This suggests the  importance of spatial topography for the brain at a deeper and  more  fundamental  layer,  that we  intend as a  deeper organizational and structuring principle, beyond  its single regions/networks  with  their  respective  cognitive,  affective,  and social  functions.

Even  more  relevant,  we  could  demonstrate  how  the  brain's topographic  organization  of  spatial  nestedness  is  related  to correspondingly  nested  layers of self. This supports, albeit tentatively, the assumption  that  spatial  topography,  that  is, spatial  nestedness  is  shared  as  'common  currency'  by  both brain  and  self  and,  more  generally,  by  brain  and  psyche.

FIGURE 5  | The model of self that embeds and contains the topographical model of Id-Ego-Superego conceptualized by Freud.

<!-- image -->

Freud and psychoanalysis target a deeper layer of the mind. Rather  than  focusing  on  the  conscious  at  the  surface,  they venture  into  the  unconscious  depth  of  our  psyche.  The  view of the brain in terms of topography (and dynamic) now allows to take into view a corresponding depth layer within the brain itself.  Rather  than  on  specific  functions  with  their  affective, cognitive, or social contents (either conscious or unconscious), the  focus  is  here  on  topography  (and  dynamic),  something that eludes even our unconscious let alone our consciousness it is the non-conscious brain that yields our unconscious psyche.

We see  here  that  such  most  fundamental  or  depth  layer  of the  brain  is  key  in  providing  the  structure  or  organization  of the basic layers of the psyche like the spatial nestedness constituting  the  hierarchy  of  self.  We  consequently  speak  of a  'Basis  model of self-specificity' (BMSS) which, in a nutshell, states that self-specificity permeates all layers of input processing including interoceptive, exteroceptive, proprioceptive, and cognitive/mental  (Northoff,  2016).

The  Qin  et  al.  (2020)  study  illustrates  that  such  basic  or fundamental  sense  of  self  with  (Scalabrini  et  al.,  2021)  its different layers is featured by a particular topographic organization, that is, spatial nestedness as shared by both brain and  self  as  their  'common  currency'  (Northoff  et  al.,  2020b). Such  more  basic  and  fundamental  view  of  the  role  of  self aligns more  or  less well with  the  various  psychodynamic conceptions departing from an intra-psychic vantage point (e.g., Freud) and moving further to a more interpsychic or relational point  of  view  of  self  as  proposed  by  Kohut,  Winnicott,  Stern, Bromberg, Fonagy, Solms, and Panksepp and Biven (and many others;  see  Northoff,  2011;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2018;  as  well  as Spagnolo  and  Northoff,  2021  for  details).

## PART  III:  TEMPORAL  DYNAMIC  SCALE-FREENESS  AS  'COMMON CURRENCY'  OF  BRAIN  AND  SELF

'The brain might be a transformer station, in which the relatively infinite  tension  or  intensity  of  the  psyche  proper  is  transformed into  perceptible  frequencies  or  'extensions. ' ~  Carl  Jung,  Letters Vol.  II,  Pages  43-47.

## Dynamic of the Brain -Operation Across Different Timescales in a Scale-Free Way

The  brain's  spontaneous  neural  activity  can  be  characterized by  different  frequencies  ranging  from  infraslow  (0.01-0.1 Hz), over  slow  (0.1  -  1hz),  fast  (1  -  40 Hz)  to  ultrafast  (40-180 Hz; Buzsaki,  2006).  Power  is  strongest  in  the  infraslow  range  and decreases  across  the  slow,  fast,  and  ultrafast  ranges  following a  power  law  distribution  (He  et  al.,  2010;  He,  2014;  Huang et al., 2016). Together, the different frequencies and their distinct degrees  of  power  constitute  a  complex  temporal  structure  in the brain's spontaneous  activity  which,  in  large parts,  can be featured by the balance between infraslow, slow, and faster  frequencies.

The relationship between these frequencies is maintained across different temporal scales and can therefore be characterized by what is described as 'scale-free dynamics' (Linkenkaer-Hansen et  al.,  2001;  He  et  al.,  2010;  He,  2014). Roughly,  scale-free  activity  describes  the  fractal  (i.e.,  selfsimilar)  organization  and  thus  temporal  nestedness  in  the relationship between  power  and  the different frequency ranges:  the  longer  and  more  powerful  slower  frequencies

nest and contain the shorter and less powerful faster frequencies - this amounts to long-range temporal correlation (LRTC) which operates across different time scales or frequencies (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al., 2001; He et al., 2010; He,  2014;  Northoff  and  Huang,  2017;  see Figures  6A,B ).

The LRTC makes it possible to assess the degree to which past neuronal patterns exert their influence on future dynamics, thus  accounting  for  LRTC  (Linkenkaer-Hansen  et  al.,  2001; Northoff  and  Huang,  2017).  That  amounts  to  a  form  of memory  that  is  here  defined  not  by  specific  contents  that are encoded, stored, and recalled or retrieved. Instead, memory refers here to the  structure,  the  temporal  structure of  the  neural  activity  across  distinct  time  points.  One  could thus  speak  of  temporal  memory  or  dynamic  memory,  that is,  process-  and  structure-based  memory,  as  distinct  from the more content-based cognitive memory in the traditional sense  (Hasson  et  al.,  2015;  Northoff,  2017).  Accordingly, LRTC  and  henceforth  scale-free  activity  provide  not  only temporal stability through their correlation of different timescales,  that  is,  temporal  continuity,  but  also  temporal memory, that is, temporal stability, through connecting past, future,  and  present  timepoint  ( Figure  6A ).

## The Scale-Free Self - The Brain's LRTC Shape the Self

Is  the  self  related  to  the  LRTC  of  the  brain's  neural  activity? Recent  studies  have  shown  that  the  brain's  scale-free  activity, as measured with either Power Law Exponent (PLE) or Detrended Fluctuation  Analysis,  is  related  to  mental  features  such  as  the self  (Huang  et  al.,  2016;  Scalabrini  et  al.,  2017,  2019;  Wolff et  al.,  2019).  Together,  these  studies  show  that  the  degree  of resting state PLE  directly  predicts: (1) the degree  of selfconsciousness  (Huang  et  al.,  2016;  Wolff  et  al.,  2019)  (2)  taskrelated  activity  during  self-specific  stimuli  (Scalabrini  et  al., 2019), and (3) the degree of temporal integration on a psychological  level  of  self-specificity  (Kolvoort  et  al.,  2020).

Let  us  describe  the  findings  in  more  detail.  Huang  et  al. (2016)  and  Wolff  et  al.  (2019)  recorded  resting  state  activity in  fMRI  and  EEG  of  the  brain,  that  is,  a  task-free  condition without  any  external  demands.  They  calculated  the  degree  of the  brain's  PLE  in  both  fMRI  and  EEG.  The  same  subjects also  underwent  psychological  investigation  of  their  self  with the self-consciousness scale. Both studies found the  same relationship  of  brain  PLE  and  self-consciousness:  The  higher the  PLE,  that  is,  the  more  the  slow-fast  power  balance  is

<!-- image -->

shifted  toward  the  slow  pole,  the  higher  the  degree  of  the subject's  private  self-consciousness  (see Figure  6B ).

Importantly,  these  findings  hold  only  for  the  PLE  as  index of slow-fast balance but not for either the slow or fast frequencies alone.  Finally,  it  shall  be  mentioned  that  this  concerns  a  wide range  of  frequency  range,  from  very  slow  (0.01  to  0.1 Hz),  as covered by fMRI (Huang et al., 2016), to faster ones as measured in  EEG  (1-80 Hz)  (Wolff  et  al.,  2019).  This  means  that  it  is the  degree  slow-fast  integration,  that  is,  their  degree  of  scalefreeness,  that  is  related  to  the  sense  of  self.  The  self  is  thus intrinsically scale-free as it connects and links different timescales short/fast  and  long/slow.  Such  cross-scale  self  exhibits  both temporal  continuity  and  discontinuity  and  nests  them  within each other in a scale-free way: temporal continuity, as mediated by  the  more  powerful  slower  frequencies,  nests  and  contains temporal discontinuity, as related to the less powerful faster  frequencies.

## Dynamic of Brain and Psyche - ScaleFreeness as 'Common Currency' of Brain and Self

Is such self-specificity of the brain's internal resting state activity also  carried  over  to  external  task  demands  during  self-specific tasks?  This  was  studied  in  fMRI  by  Scalabrini  et  al.  (2017, 2019). He measured both rest and task during the active touch toward an animate (another person) and non-animate (mannequin  hand)  targets.  They  observed  that  the  degree  of PLE in the resting state predicted the degree to which subjects could differentiate in their task-related activity between animate and non-animate targets.  Given  that  rest  and  task  states  occur and  are  measured  at  distinct  points  in  time,  this  strongly suggest  a  memory  effect:  The  temporal  or  dynamic  memory of the resting state is carried over to the task state as otherwise the  latter  could  not  be  modulated  by  the  former.  Given  that such temporal memory effect in terms of rest-task modulation was related to the self-non-self differentiation,  one  would strongly  assume  it  to  be  self-specific.

How does such self-specific temporal memory of the resting state  affect  the  task  states?  This  was  addressed  by  Kolvoort et  al.  (2020)  in  an  EEG  study  on  self.  They  measured  resting state  in  EEG  and  conducted  a  psychological  self-task  where subjects  were  required  to  associate  self-  and  non-self-specific stimuli  across  different  time  delays  (from  200 ms  to  1,400 ms). They  demonstrate  that  the  self-specific effects in terms  of accuracy was preserved across all temporal delays with intersubject  variation.  That,  in  turn,  was  related  to  the  resting state PLE: the higher the resting state PLE, that is, the stronger the  slower  frequencies  relative  to  the  faster  ones,  the  stronger the  self-specific  effect  was  preserved  across  the  different  time delays  on  the  psychological  level.  This  suggests  that  temporal integration of different timescales as indexed  by  temporal memory may be key in mediating the co-occurrence temporal stability  and  flexibility  of  the  self.

Together,  these  findings  suggest  that  the  self  is  intrinsically dynamic in that it integrates and combines temporal continuity and  discontinuity across different timescales, that is, in a scale-free  way.  The  data  show  that  the  brain's  degree  of  scalefreeness  is  key  in  mediating  the  self  which,  psychologically, is manifest in the link of temporal continuity and discontinuity. Since  temporal  discontinuity  and  continuity  concern  different timescales,  that  is,  fast  and  slow,  one  can  also  speak  of  scalefreeness  on  the  psychological  level  of  self  (which  remains  to be  demonstrated  empirically,  though).

More generally,  scale-freeness  may  be  shared  by  both  brain and self as their 'common  currency.' This points to the importance  of  (1)  conceiving  the  brain  in  terms  of  dynamic, that  is,  scale-freeness  of  neural  activity  and  (2)  taking  into view the corresponding manifestation of dynamic in organizing the  psyche  in  a  temporal  way,  that  is,  the  scale-freeness  of self.  Accordingly,  the  example  of  self  strongly  encourages  the utility and validity of Spatiotemporal Neuroscience for providing the  intimate  (and  necessary)  connection  of  brain  and  psyche through  topography  and  dynamic.

## PART  IV:  'PROJECT  FOR  A SPATIOTEMPORAL  NEUROSCIENCE'  EXTENDING  FREUD  AND  SOLMS

## 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' - Complementing and Extending Freud

After  having  provided  empirical  support  for  Spatiotemporal Neuroscience, we are now ready to provide an answer to Freud's original  quest  for  an  intimate  link  of  psyche  and  brain  as developed in his 'Project for a Scientific Psychology. ' Following Freud's view of the psyche, Spatiotemporal Neuroscience considers the brain's neural activity as topographic, dynamic, and essentially spatiotemporal. Hence, spatial topographic and temporal dynamic features  provide  the  features  that  are  shared  by  the  brain's neural  activity  and  the  psyche's  psychodynamic  features,  their 'common  currency'  ( Figure  7 ).

Taken  in  a  nutshell,  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience  provides the  missing  link  of  brain  and  psyche  which  remained  elusive to  Freud  at  his  time.  We  therefore  speak  of  the  need  for  a 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience. ' What do we mean by  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  and  how  does it stand in relation to Freud's original 'Project for a Scientific  Psychology'?

The  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  aims to  develop  the  kind  of  neuroscience  that,  by  establishing a  temporal  dynamic  and  spatial  topographic  view  of  the brain  and  its  various  functions,  allows  for  their  intimate connection  with  the  psyche's  psychodynamic  features  (see orange  arrow  in Figure  2 ).  This  complements  and  extends Freud's original Project which, due to the lack of neuroscientific  research  at  its  time,  could  not  conceive  the dynamic  and  topography  of  the  brain.  Accordingly,  the 'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  provides  Freud with the kind of neuroscience that allows him to intimately link his view of the psyche to the brain and  thus to complement  his  original  project.

<!-- image -->

## 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' II - Empirical Convergence With Solms' '(New) Project for a Scientific Psychology'

How  does  our  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience' stand  in  relation  to  the  recently  proposed  '(New)  Project for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  by  Mark  Solms  (Solms,  2020)? Mark Solms recently proposed a 'New Scientific Psychology' (Solms, 2020, 2021) where he casts Freud's original 'Scientific Psychology'  in  the  terms  of  free  energy  and  predictive coding. He uses the physical-biological framework of affective neuroscience  (AF,  Panksepp,  1998),  free  energy  principle (FEP) and predictive coding (PC) to account for psychodynamic concepts like memory, primary and secondary processes,  cathexis,  dreams,  and  the  ego  as  basic  structure or  organization.  Following  Freud's  'Scientific  Psychology,' he  uses  the  original  text  as  template  for  reformulating  it in terms of Friston's FEP coupled with the Affective Neuroscience  by Panksepp, relying particularly on what Panksepp call the primal 'SELF' where the role of the PAG and  the  brain  stem  is  central  for  both 'the  terminus  of every  affect  circuit  and  the  genesis  of  every  newly  felt  affect' (Solms,  2020,  p.10).

How  does  Solms'  Project  of  a  'New  scientific  Psychology' stand in relation to the here proposed 'Project for a Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'?  First  and  foremost,  both  are not  exclusive  but  compatible.  There  is  plenty  of  convergence between  Panksepp's  AN,  Friston's  FEP  coupled  with  PC  on the  one  hand  and  the  spatiotemporal  approach  to  the  brain in  terms  of  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience.  His  '(New)  Project for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  thus  converges  with  our  'Project for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience. '

Prediction  and  free  energy  are  driven  by  a  deeper  layer  of the  brain's  temporal  dynamics,  that  is,  deep  temporal  models (Kiebel  et  al.,  2008;  Friston  et  al.,  2017).  Deeper  layer  is  not here  understood  in  terms  of  time  and  space  scales  but  in terms of a deeper organizational and structuring principle that holds  across  all  other  subsequent  layers  as  well  as  across  all time-space scales. Spatiotemporal neuroscience may thus provide the  temporal  (and  spatial  topographic)  underpinnings  driving PC as we see in the case of the self. The same holds analogously in  the  case  of  FEP  that  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  scalefree  and  that  operated  at  multiple  and  nested  spatial  scale and timescale (Friston et al., 2015): These represent the intrinsic temporal  dynamic  and  spatial  topographical  features  of  FEP . In other words, the spatiotemporal, that is,  dynamic  and topographic configurations in the matching of brain and environment  are  key  in  mediating  the  degree  of  free  energy, that  is,  FEP .  Accordingly,  both  FEP  and  PC  may  be  driven, on  a  holistic  and  more  fundamental  level,  by  dynamic  and topography. Spatiotemporal Neuroscience thus provides a deeper more  holistic  and  comprehensive  empirical  layer  of  the  brain that  can  integrate  and  make  us  better  understand  how  the brain  can  yield  PC  and  FEP .  In  this  context,  we  tried  to explicate a deeper layer in FEP and PC that drives and organizes both  but  is  not  yet  by  itself  explicated  as  such.  A  similar relation  can  be  found  between  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience and Panksepp's AN. Also in this case, Spatiotemporal Neuroscience  provides  the  dynamic  and  the  topography  that organize  and  structure  the  generation  of  affects  and  feelings.

Again  our  approach  is  not  exclusive  but  rather  holistic  and comprehensive in its' own purpose to provides the topographical and  dynamic  ground  on  which  the  different  functions  and manifestation  of  the  brain  and  psyche  are  generated.  Hence, our  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  empirically converges  with  and  complements  Solms'  '(New)  Project  for  a Scientific  Psychology. '

## 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' III - Conceptual Extension of Solms' '(New) Project for a Scientific Psychology'

Do  we  need  both  FEP/PC  and  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience? Or  is  one  sufficient  to  explain  the  psyche?  FEP/PC  explain and mathematically formulate brilliantly the physical-biological features  of  the  brain  as  both  FEP  and  PC  strongly  borrow from  physics  and  biology.  However,  that  leaves  open  in  both FEP/PC  and  Solms  how  the  brain's  states  are  connected  to and,  ultimately,  can  transform  into  psychical  or  mental  states. Let  us  highlight  this  point.

We  are  encountering  theoretical  and  empirical  questions in  our  aim  to  intimately  connect  brain  and  psyche:  what provides  the  necessary  condition  or  intrinsic  feature  of  the transition  and  connection  from  brain  to  psyche?  Why  and how  does  the  brain's  neural  activity  transform  into  psychic activity with its various functions (affective, social, cognitive, etc.) shaped by PC/FEP? Necessary connection (as theoretical concept)  and  transformation  (as  empirical  concept)  mean here  that  if  the  neuronal  state  appears  in  a  particular  way, it cannot avoid being associated with or entailing the presence of a particular psychical or mental state. We  are thus encountering  a  'gap  of  contingency'  between  brain  and psyche something that, in the specific instance of consciousness, has also described as 'hard problem'  in philosophy  (Chalmers,  1996).

How  can  we  close  the  'gap  of  contingency'  between  brain and psyche? This is the moment where Spatiotemporal Neuroscience, together with the assumption of  'common currency, ' comes in. Brain and psyche share spatial topographic and  temporal  dynamic  features  as  their  'common  currency' which  underlie  and  shape  PC  and  FEP  and  subsequently  the respective  affective  and  cognitive  functions.  This,  as  detailed in Northoff (2018), provides an intrinsic or necessary a posteriori connection of brain and psyche. The 'gap of contingency' can consequently  be  closed  and,  even  stronger,  be  resolved  by Spatiotemporal Neuroscience through its assumption of spatial topography  and  temporal  dynamic  providing  the  'common currency'  of  brain  and  psyche.

This  carries  major  implications  for  the  relationship  of  our 'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  to  Solms'  '(New) Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology. '  By  providing  analogous views  of  brain  and  psyche  in  terms  of  topography,  dynamic, and spatiotemporality, the 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience'  bridges  and  resolves  the  'gap  of  contingency' of  brain  and  psyche.  Since  the  'gap  of  contingency'  is  still present  in  Friston's  concepts  of  FEP  and  PC,  Solms'  '(New)

Project for a Scientific Psychology' cannot avoid this gap either ( Figure  8 ).

This is the moment where the '(New) Project for a Scientific Psychology' may want to turn to our 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience':  the  latter's  focus  on  the  brain's  topography  and dynamic  providing  the  shared  feature  or  'common  currency' with  the  psyche  can  close  the  'gap  of  contingency'  in  Solms' '(New) Project for a Scientific Psychology. ' Taken in this sense, the  'Project  for  a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  conceptually extends  the  '(New)  Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  by providing a more  intimate, that is, necessary a posteriori (Northoff,  2018)  connection  of  brain  and  psyche  ( Figure  9 ).

Closing  the  'gap  of  contingency'  of  brain  and  psyche  is not  only  of  theoretical-conceptual  importance  but  also  in  a very practical sense. The 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' allows us to develop a novel form of psychodynamic psychotherapy, namely, Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy. Although it remains to be fully explicated, we at least  want  to  provide  some  initial  hints  about  such  temporally and  spatially  based  psychotherapy.

## Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy I - Spatial and Temporal Integration of Self Through the Therapist

What  is  the  goal  of  psychotherapy?  In  our  neuroscientifically informed  view,  the  goal  of  psychotherapy  is  (1)  to  reverse maladaptive topographic-dynamic re-organization of brain and (2)  to  establish  a  more  adaptive  and  stable  spatiotemporal nestedness  of  brain  and  self  thereby  re-establishing  a  proper nested hierarchy of self. This process, in  accordance  with contemporary  psychoanalysis,  might  serve  to  re-establish  the subjective  sense  of  integrity,  coherence,  and  continuity  of  self over  time  and  space,  similar  to  what  has  been  described  by Philip  Bromberg:  'health  is  the  ability  to  stand  in  the  spaces between  realities  without  losing  any  of  them  -  the  capacity to feel like one self while being many' (Bromberg, 1996, p. 166).

Psychotherapeutically, this  means  that  we  may  need  to operates  at  the  subjects'  level  of  perception  (or  experience)  of time, i.e.,  dynamics, and space, i.e., topography as the building blocks  of  individuals  self-states  (and  ultimately  their  brain's temporal dynamic and spatial topographic structure) to remedy and  heal  their  discrepancies,  discontinuities,  dis-integrity  of the sense of self. In this context, we explicitly refer to contemporary psychoanalysis of self and relatedness (i.e., object relations)  leaving  beyond  classical  concept  of  psychoanalysis, such  as  drives,  conflicts,  and  defense  mechanisms.  Our  target is  here  to  focus  on  the  sense  of  self  and  its  intrinsic  features. Our  aim  is  to  neuroscientifically  inform  psychotherapy  and expand  our  knowledge  on  the  self  and  its  intrinsic  features at  neuro-psychodynamic level. At the current stage, our model here  does  not  aim  to  change  or  provides  new  therapeutic techniques; nevertheless, spatiotemporal psychotherapy provides a more comprehensive and neuroscientific informed framework that  might  be  useful  for  therapists.

For  instance,  the  therapist  may  need  to  operate  at  building blocks  of  consciousness  and  unconscious  processing  through

<!-- image -->

spatial topographic and temporal dynamic means: the therapist needs  to connect  (virtually or symbolically) her/his larger (spatial  topographic  and  temporal  dynamic)  scales  of  her/his own  exteroceptive  and/or  mental  self  to  the  more  restricted of  his  client's  interoceptive  self.  Pragmatically,  this  means  that operating in the dual relational field, the therapist must operate in the transferential-contertransferential matrix using the 'common  currency'  of  time  and  space  as  the  cardinal  points to  note  and work  through the  moments  of  rupture  of  the sense  of  self  and  its  intrinsic  features.

This  analytical  dance  in  the  transitional  space  and  time of  the  real  and  the  virtual  relationship  between  the  two subjects made by continuous 'ruptures and repairs' provides the  client  with  the  opportunity  to  integrate  and  nest  her/ his  own  more  restricted  spatiotemporal  scales  of  her/his interoceptive  self  in  a  virtual,  that  is,  interpersonal  way into  the  larger  ones  of  her/his  therapist.  That,  in  turn,  will allow  the  client  to  process  the  traumatic  input  relationships in  a  non-threatening  and  non-disrupting  way  for  her/his own  self  without  becoming  fragmented  and  loosing  the access to one's interoceptive self. The traumatic input relationships  associated  with  the  own  interoceptive  self  are now integrated and nested virtually (or symbolically) within the therapists' larger spatiotemporal scales (of the therapist's exteroceptive  and  mental  self).

Accordingly,  the  therapeutic  aim  here  is  to  spatially  and temporally  re-integrate  the  different  layers  of  self:  that  serves the  purpose  to  connect  the  different  layers  of  self  such  that they  can  become  conscious  together  rather  than  being  split off and isolated into the dynamic unconscious (as in dissociation). Dissociation here operates in terms  of lack of integration between the different layers of the self and seems to be mediated by  the  lack  of  connectivity  (thus  integrative  function)  in  the right  anterior  insula  with  the  rest  of  the  brain  at  different spatiotemporal  scales  (Scalabrini  et  al.,  2020b)  accompanied by  the  loss  of  first-person  perspective.  Consequently,  healing the self means to re-establish the sense of self-continuity beyond the dissociation of its trauma. This is possible by re-stablishing and/or re-organizing the topography and dynamic of the nested hierarchy of both self and its brain through spatial and temporal means -this amounts to what we here describe as 'Spatiotemporal  Psychotherapy. '

<!-- image -->

## Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy II - Timing, Spatialness, Dynamic, and Shared TimeSpace

What is Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy? Spatiotemporal psychotherapy consists in modulating the individual's subjectively perceived (consciously and unconsciously) time-scale and spacescale  on  both  neural  and  psychological  levels.  This  process calls  into  account  the  role  of  the  therapist  that  here  works  at the  edges  of  different  affectives  and  self-states  characterized by  their  respective  time-scale  and  space-scale.  The  primary purpose of  the  therapist  is  to  reach  and  integrate  their  clients' dissociated  spatiotemporal  layers  of  self  with  their  respective affects and thoughts (this is consistent with the work on different traumatic  levels  that  has  been  clinically  described  by  Mucci, 2013,  2018;  Mucci  and  Scalabrini,  2021).

The  primary  means  of  such  spatiotemporal  psychotherapy are thus spatial and temporal in both intra-personal experience/ perception and interpersonal transference. This targets the most basic  and  fundamental  layers  of  existence  (Scalabrini  et  al., 2020c), the spatiotemporal coordinates that tie together different people  like  therapist  and  client  while,  at  the  same  time,  being most vulnerable to traumatic events and influences. Importantly, the  main  therapeutic  direction  of  client-therapist  interaction is from their shared inter-personal space and time to the intrapersonal  experiences/perceptions  of  the  client  (and  those  of the  therapist).

How does Spatiotemporal Psychotherapy work? For instance,  the  therapist  may  provide  more  stable,  regular, and  continuous  mixture  of  slow  and  fast  timescales  trying to  be  'sufficiently'  aligned  with  the  patient  in  the  analytic dance.  This  process  aim  to  regularize,  stabilize,  and  make the temporal dynamic flow of the client's neural and psychic activity  more  continuous.  While  at  the  same  time,  this  will allow integrating temporal discontinuity and change as related to  traumata.  This,  as  we  hypothesize,  should  complement and  mirror  the  client's  self-state  increasing  these  subjects' arousal  level  modulating  their  affect  and  emotion  as  well as  their  thought  dynamic  (Rostami  et  al.,  2021).  Hence, timing, spatialness, and temporal dynamic within the interaction of client and therapist will be key in such psychotherapeutic  regulatory  approach.

A psychotherapy that is interpersonally attuned in time and aligned  in  space  might  provide  a  more  comprehensive,  basic, and  extensive  operating  field  that  also  embed  and  contains affective, social, cognitive functions within a larger more comprehensive context. Here, we suggest the therapists to work using  these  spatiotemporal  coordinates  beyond  the  contents and  the  narratives  of  the  patients.  The  shared  time  and  space between therapist and client might here be seen as an operating commonly  shared  interpersonal  spatiotemporal  field,  which makes  possible  the  re-organization  and  transformation  of  the client's intra-personal nested hierarchy of self through its

spatiotemporal manifestation within her/his brain (See Spagnolo and  Northoff,  2021).

In  case  of  very  severe  psychiatric  patients,  one  could  also complement such temporo-spatial psychotherapy by brain-based intervention operating on the basis of the brain's spatiotemporal features.  For  instance,  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  may, if  stimulating  in  the  'right'  frequency,  can  foster  and  facilitate slow-fast  temporal  integration  on  the  neuronal  level  of,  for instance,  the  default-mode  network  (DMN)  in  order  to  help the  client  to  remit  from  dissociating  her/his  own  mental  self and  to  enlarge  its  spatial  and  temporal  scales  beyond  those related  to  its  'traumatic  shrinking. '  That,  in  turn,  provides  the ground for the more virtual or symbolic work with the therapist to  re-order,  re-integrate,  and  re-nest  the  client's  mental  self within  her/his  own  intero-  and  exteroceptive  self  ( Figure  10 ).

## CONCLUSION  -  'PROJECT  FOR  A SPATIOTEMPORAL  NEUROSCIENCE'

## Mismatch of Brain and Psyche - Adapting the Model of Brain

Freud  searched  for  the  scientific  basis  of  the  psyche  in  the brain.  He  deemed  his  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  a failure,  though,  as  he  was  not  able  to  intimately  the  psyche's topography, dynamic, and spatiotemporal features to corresponding  features  in  the  brain.  Having  more  insight  in our times, current neuropsychoanalysis aims to trace the psyche's topography, dynamic, and spatiotemporality to the brain's affective and  cognitive  (and  social  and  cultural)  functions  including their  predictive  coding  and  free  energy.  However,  we  argue that,  despite  all  progress,  such  approach  does  not  yet  fully complete  the  Freudian'  quest:  It  does  not  provide  the  kind  of intimate,  that  is,  necessary  connection  of  brain  and  psyche that  allows  closing  their  'gap  of  contingency'  which  Freud deemed  necessary  to  complete  his  project.

Specifically, the current neuropsychoanalytic approach suffers from  a  mismatch  in  its  presupposed  models  of  brain  and psyche. Following Freud and others, the psyche is characterized by  dynamic,  topography,  and  spatiotemporality.  That  is  related to  a  model  of  the  brain  in  Cognitive,  Social  and  Affective Neuroscience  where  the  brain  is  conceived  as  static  (rather than dynamic), modular (rather than topographic), and non-spatiotemporal (rather than spatiotemporal). This amounts to a mismatch between the models of psyche and brain, though. That,  in  turn,  prevents  us  from  taking  into  view  the  intimate or  necessary  brain-psyche  connection  one  requires  to  properly complete  Freud's  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology. '

How  can  we  adapt  our  model  of  brain  to  the  model  of psyche  Freud  and  others  envision  in  psychoanalysis?  For  that, we have to take into view the brain's intrinsic spatial topography

FIGURE 10  | Visual representation of spatiotemporal psychotherapy.

<!-- image -->

and temporal dynamics. This leads us to Spatiotemporal Neuroscience  (Northoff  et  al.,  2020a,b).  Unlike  its  cognitive, affective, and social siblings, Spatiotemporal Neuroscience conceives the brain's neural activity primarily in terms  of topography,  dynamic,  and  spatiotemporality  which,  in  turn, structure and organize various functions including their predictive coding  and  free  energy.  Accordingly,  conceiving  brain  and psyche in analogous ways, Spatiotemporal Neuroscience allows to take into view their intimate or necessary connection through shared features ('common  currency'), that is, topography, dynamic,  and  spatiotemporality.

## 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' - Complementing Freud and Solms

The  introduction  of  such  spatiotemporal  model  of  the  brain by  Spatiotemporal  neuroscience  carries  major  implications  for neuropsychoanalysis. Freud characterized the psyche by dynamic, topography, and spatiotemporality but was missing a corresponding model of the brain - his 'Project for a Scientific Psychology'  was  thus  doomed  to  failure.  In  a  more  recent brave  attempt,  Mark  Solms  aims  to  provide  the  missing  pieces by  proposing  a  '(New)  Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology' (Solms,  2020,  2021).  By  reverting  to  predictive  coding  and free  energy,  he  provides  some  of  the  missing  pieces  of  the puzzle  but  nevertheless  leaves  open  the  intimate  or  necessary connection  of  brain  and  psyche  as  he  still  relies  largely  on (the  model of the brain provided by) Affective, Cognitive, and Social  Neuroscience.

This  is  the  moment  where  our  proposed  'Project  for  a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' comes in. Spatiotemporal Neuroscience  provides  a  model  of  the  brain  that  is  more  or less  analogous  to  Freud's  view  of  the  psyche.  That,  in  turn, makes  it  possible  to  take  into  view  topography,  dynamic,  and

## REFERENCES

- Babo-Rebelo,  M.,  Buot,  A.,  and  Tallon-Baudry,  C.  (2019).  Neural  responses  to heartbeats  distinguish  self  from  other  during  imagination. NeuroImage 191, 10-20.  doi:  10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.012
- Babo-Rebelo,  M.,  Wolpert,  N.,  Adam,  C.,  Hasboun,  D.,  and  Tallon-Baudry,  C. (2016).  Is  the  cardiac  monitoring  function  related  to  the  self  in  both  the default  network  and  right  anterior  insula? Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lond.  Ser. B  Biol.  Sci. 371:20160004.  doi:  10.1098/rstb.2016.0004
- Boeker,  H.  (2018).  'Psychoanalysis  and  neuroscience:  The  development  of Neuropsychoanalysis,'  in Neuropsychodynamic  Psychiatry .  eds.  H.  Boeker,  P . Hartwich  and  G.  Northoff  (Cham:  Springer),  19-48.
- Bromberg,  P.  M.  (1996).  Standing  in  the  spaces:  The  multiplicity  of  self  and the psychoanalytic relationship. Cont. psychoanal. 32, 509-535. doi: 10.1080/00107530.1996.10746334
- Buzsaki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the Brain . United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory . United  Kingdom:  Oxford  Paperbacks.
- Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., and Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016).  Mind-wandering  as  spontaneous  thought:  a  dynamic  framework. Nat.  Rev.  Neurosci. 17,  718-731.  doi:  10.1038/nrn.2016.113
- Craig,  A.  D.  (2003).  Interoception:  the  sense  of  the  physiological  condition  of the body. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 500-505. doi: 10.1016/ S0959-4388(03)00090-4

spatiotemporality  as  the  shared  features  of  brain  and  psyche, their 'common currency' (Northoff et al., 2020a,b). This closes the  theoretical,  conceptual,  and  empirical  gap  between  brain and  psyche,  the  'gap  of  contingency, '  which  both  Freud  and Solms  did  not  overcome.

In conclusion, the 'Project for a Spatiotemporal Neuroscience' complements  Freud's  'Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology'  on theoretical grounds. At the same time, it converges empirically with  and  extends  conceptually  beyond  Solms'  '(New)  Project for  a  Scientific  Psychology. '  While  practically,  the  'Project  for a  Spatiotemporal  Neuroscience'  lays  the  groundwork  for  a novel  form  of  neuroscientific  informed  psychotherapy,  namely Spatiotemporal  Psychotherapy.

## AUTHOR  CONTRIBUTIONS

GN and AS wrote the article together. All authors contributed to  the  article  and  approved  the  submitted  version.

## FUNDING

This  project/research  was  supported  by  the  Michael  Smith Foundation  Canada  Research  Chair,  by  the  grant  from  the Ministry  of  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  National  Key RandD  Program  of  China  (2016YFC1306700)  and  from  the European Union's Horizon 2020 Framework Program for Research and Innovation under the Specific Grant Agreement No. 785907 (Human Brain Project SGA2), the ERANET grant, NFRF grant, and  Team  grant  from  uOMBRI  to  GN  and  by  'Search  for Excellence - UdA' (University G. d' Annunzio of Chieti Pescara) to  AS  for  the  project  SYNC  (The  Self  and  its  psYchological and  Neuronal  Correlates  -  Implications  for  the  understanding and  treatment  of  depression  as  a  disorder  of  Self).

- Craig,  A.  D.  (2010).  The  sentient  self. Brain  Struct.  Funct. 214,  563-577.  doi: 10.1007/s00429-010-0248-y
- Damasio,  A.  (2010). Self  Comes  to  Mind:  Constructing  the  Conscious  Brain . United  States:  Pantheon  Books
- Edelman,  G.  M.  (1987). Neural  Darwinism:  The  Theory  of  Neuronal  Group Selection .  United  States:  Basic  books.
- Edelman,  G.  M.  (1989). The Remembered  Present:  A  Biological Theory of Consciousness .  United  States:  Basic  Books.
- Edelman,  G.  M.  (1992). Bright  Air,  Brilliant  Fire:  On  the  Matter  of  the  Mind . United  States:  Basic  books
- Freud,  S.  (1895). Project  for  a  Scientific  Psychology .  London:  Hogarth  Press.
- Freud,  S.  (1900). The  Interpretation  of  Dreams.  S.  E.,  4 &amp; 5 .  London:  Hogarth.
- Freud,  S.  (1915). The  unconscious.  S.  E .,  14,  166-204.  London:  Hogarth.
- Friston,  K.,  Levin,  M.,  Sengupta,  B.,  and  Pezzulo,  G.  (2015).  Knowing  one's place:  a  free-energy  approach  to  pattern  regulation. J. R. Soc.  Interface 12:20141383.  doi:  10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
- Friston,  K.  J.,  Parr,  T.,  and  de  Vries,  B.  (2017).  The  graphical  brain:  belief propagation  and  active  inference. Netw  Neurosci. 1,  381-414.  doi:  10.1162/ NETN\_a\_00018
- Gallagher, S. (2005). Dynamic models of body schematic processes. Adv. Conscious. Res. 62,  233-250.  doi:  10.1075/aicr.62.15gal
- Hasson,  U.,  Chen,  J.,  and  Honey,  C.  J.  (2015).  Hierarchical  process  memory: memory as  an  integral  component  of  information  processing. Trends  Cogn. Sci. 19,  304-313.  doi:  10.1016/j.tics.2015.04.006

- He,  B.  J.  (2014).  Scale-free  brain  activity:  past,  present,  and  future. Trends Cogn.  Sci. 18,  480-487.  doi:  10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.003
- He, B. J.,  Zempel, J. M., Snyder, A. Z., and Raichle, M. E. (2010). The temporal structures  and  functional  significance  of  scale-free  brain  activity. Neuron 66,  353-369.  doi:  10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.020
- Huang,  Z.,  Obara,  N.,  Davis,  H.  H.  4th,  Pokorny,  J.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2016). The temporal structure of resting-state brain activity in the medial prefrontal cortex predicts self-consciousness. Neuropsychologia , 82, 161-170. doi: 10.1016/j. neuropsychologia.2016.01.025
- Kernberg, O. F. (1984). Severe Personality Disorders: Psychotherapeutic Strategies . New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  UP .
- Kiebel,  S.  J.,  Daunizeau,  J.,  and  Friston,  K.  J.  (2008).  A  hierarchy  of  time-scales and the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4:e1000209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209
- Kolvoort, I. R., Wainio-Theberge, S., Wolff, A., and Northoff, G. (2020). Temporal integration  as  'common  currency'  of  brain  and  self-scale-free  activity  in resting-state  EEG  correlates  with  temporal  delay  effects  on  self-relatedness. Hum.  Brain  Mapp. 41,  4355-4374.  doi:  10.1002/hbm.25129
- Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (2018). Finding the Body in the Mind: Embodied Memories, Trauma,  and  Depression .  United  Kingdom:  Routledge.
- Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V . V ., Palva, J. M., and Ilmoniemi, R. J. (2001). Long-range temporal correlations and scaling behavior in human brain oscillations. J.  Neurosci. 21,  1370-1377.  doi:  10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-04-01370.2001
- Logothetis, N.  K., Murayama,  Y.,  Augath,  M.,  Steffen,  T.,  Werner,  J.,  and Oeltermann,  A.  (2009).  How  not  to  study  spontaneous  activity. NeuroImage 45,  1080-1089.  doi:  10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.010
- Longo, M. R., and Tsakiris, M. (2013). Merging second-person and first-person neuroscience. Behav.  Brain  Sci. 36:429.  doi:  10.1017/S0140525X12001975
- MacLean,  P.  D.  (1990). The  Triune  Brain  in  Evolution:  Role  in  Paleocerebral Functions .  Germany:  Springer  Science  and  Business  Media.
- Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying triple network model. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 483-506. doi: 10.1016/j. tics.2011.08.003
- Mucci,  C.  (2013). Beyond  Individual  and  Collective  Trauma:  Intergenerational Transmission,  Psychoanalytic  Treatment,  and  the  Dynamics  of  Forgiveness . United  Kingdom:  Routledge.
- Mucci,  C.  (2018). Borderline  Bodies:  Affect  Regulation  Therapy  for  Personality Disorders  (Norton  Series  on  Interpersonal  Neurobiology) .  United  States:  WW Norton  and  Company.
- Mucci, C. (2019). Traumatization Through human agency: 'embodied witnessing' is  essential  in  the  treatment  of  survivors. Am.  J.  Psychoanal. 79,  540-554. doi:  10.1057/s11231-019-09225-y
- Mucci,  C.,  and  Scalabrini,  A.  (2021).  Traumatic  effects  beyond  diagnosis:  The impact  of  dissociation  on  the  mind-body-brain  system. Psychoanal.  Psychol. doi:  10.1037/pap0000332  [Epub  ahead  of  print]
- Northoff,  G.  (2011). Neuropsychoanalysis  in  Practice:  Brain,  Self  and  Objects . United  Kingdom:  Oxford  University  Press.
- Northoff,  G.  (2012a).  Psychoanalysis  and  the  brain  -  why  did  freud  abandon neuroscience? Front.  Psychol. 3:71.  doi:  10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00071
- Northoff,  G.  (2012b).  Immanuel  Kant's  mind  and  the  brain's  resting  state. Trends  Cogn.  Sci. 16,  356-359.  doi:  10.1016/j.tics.2012.06.001
- Northoff,  G.  (2014a). Unlocking  the  Brain.  Coding.  Vol.  1 .  United  Kingdom: Oxford  University  Press.
- Northoff, G. (2014b). Unlocking the Brain. Consciousness. Vol. 2 . United Kingdom: Oxford  University  Press
- Northoff,  G.  (2016).  Is  the  self  a  higher-order  or  fundamental  function  of  the brain?  The  'basis  model  of  self-specificity'  and  its  encoding  by  the  brain's spontaneous  activity. Cogn.  Neurosci. 7,  203-222.  doi:  10.1080/17588928. 2015.1111868
- Northoff,  G.  (2017).  Personal  identity  and  cortical  midline  structure  (CMS): do temporal features of CMS neural activity transform into 'self-continuity'? Psychol.  Inq. 28,  122-131.  doi:  10.1080/1047840X.2017.1337396
- Northoff, G. (2018). The Spontaneous Brain: From the Mind-Body to the WorldBrain  Problem .  United  States:  MIT  Press.
- Northoff,  G.,  and  Panksepp,  J.  (2008).  The  trans-species  concept  of  self  and the  subcortical-cortical  midline  system. Trends  Cogn.  Sci. 12,  259-264.  doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.04.007
- Northoff,  G.,  Bermpohl,  F.,  Schoeneich,  F.,  and  Boeker,  H.  (2007).  How  does our  brain  constitute  defense  mechanisms?  First-person  neuroscience  and psychoanalysis. Psychother.  Psychosom. 76,  141-153.  doi:  10.1159/000099841
- Northoff,  G.,  Heinzel,  A.,  De  Greck,  M.,  Bermpohl,  F.,  Dobrowolny,  H.,  and Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential processing in our brain-a meta-analysis of  imaging  studies  on  the  self. NeuroImage 31,  440-457.  doi:  10.1016/j. neuroimage.2005.12.002
- Northoff, G., and Huang, Z. (2017). How do the brain's time and space mediate consciousness and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory of consciousness  (TTC). Neurosci.  Biobehav.  Rev. 80,  630-645.  doi:  10.1016/j. neubiorev.2017.07.013
- Northoff,  G.,  Qin,  P .,  and  Feinberg,  T.  E.  (2011).  Brain  imaging  of  the  self-conceptual,  anatomical  and  methodological  issues. Conscious.  Cogn. 20, 52-63.  doi:  10.1016/j.concog.2010.09.011
- Northoff, G., Wainio-Theberge,  S.,  and  Evers, K. (2020a). Is  temporo-spatial dynamics the 'common currency' of brain and mind? In quest of 'spatiotemporal neuroscience' . Phys  Life  Rev 33,  34-54.  doi:  10.1016/j.plrev.2019.05.002
- Northoff, G., Wainio-Theberge, S., and Evers, K. (2020b). Spatiotemporal neuroscience  -  what  is  it  and  why  we  need  it. Phys  Life  Rev 33,  78-87. doi:  10.1016/j.plrev.2020.06.005
- Panksepp,  J.  (1998).  The  periconscious  substrates  of  consciousness:  affective states and the evolutionary origins of the self. J.  Conscious. Stud. 5,  566-582.
- Panksepp,  J.  (2012).  What  is  an  emotional  feeling?  Lessons  about  affective origins from cross-species neuroscience. Motiv. Emot. 36, 4-15. doi: 10.1007/ s11031-011-9232-y
- Panksepp, J.,  and  Biven,  L.  (2012). The  Archaeology  of  Mind:  Neuroevolutionary Origins  of  Human  Emotions  (Norton  Series  on  Interpersonal  Neurobiology) . United  States:  WW  Norton  and  Company.
- Przyrembel,  M.,  Smallwood,  J.,  Pauen,  M.,  and  Singer,  T.  (2012).  Illuminating the  dark  matter  of  social  neuroscience:  considering  the  problem  of  social interaction from philosophical, psychological, and neuroscientific perspectives. Front.  Hum.  Neurosci. 6:190.  doi:  10.3389/fnhum.2012.00190
- Qin,  P .,  Wang,  M.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2020).  Linking  bodily,  environmental and  mental  states  in  the  self-A  three-level  model  based  on  a  meta-analysis. Neurosci.  Biobehav.  Rev. 115,  77-95.  doi:  10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.05.004
- Raichle, M. E. (2009). A paradigm shift in functional brain imaging. J.  Neurosci. 29,  12729-12734.  doi:  10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4366-09.2009
- Raichle,  M.  E.  (2010).  Two  views  of  brain  function. Trends  Cogn.  Sci. 14, 180-190.  doi:  10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.008
- Rostami,  S.,  Borjali,  A.,  Eskandari,  H.,  Rostami,  R.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2021). Novel approach to mind wandering in major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder  patients:  does  the  direction  of  thoughts  matter? Int.  J.  Behav.  Sci. 15,  66-72.  doi:  10.30491/ijbs.2021.250747.1383
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Ebisch,  S.  J.  H.,  Huang,  Z.,  Di  Plinio,  S.,  Perrucci,  M.  G., Romani, G. L., et al. (2019). Spontaneous brain activity predicts task-evoked activity During animate versus inanimate touch. Cereb. Cortex 29, 4628-4645. doi:  10.1093/cercor/bhy340
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Huang,  Z.,  Mucci,  C.,  Perrucci,  M.  G.,  Ferretti,  A.,  Fossati,  A., et  al.  (2017).  How  spontaneous  brain  activity  and  narcissistic  features  shape social  interaction. Sci.  Rep. 7:9986.  doi:  10.1038/s41598-017-10389-9
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Mucci,  C.,  Angeletti,  L.  L.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2020c).  The  self and  its  world:  a  neuro-ecological  and  temporo-spatial  account  of  existential fear. Clin.  Neuropsychiatry 17,  46-58.  doi:  10.36131/clinicalnpsych20200203
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Mucci,  C.,  Esposito,  R.,  Damiani,  S.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2020b). Dissociation  as  a  disorder  of  integration-On  the  footsteps  of  Pierre  Janet. Prog.  Neuro-Psychopharmacol.  Biol.  Psychiatry 101:109928.  doi:  10.1016/j. pnpbp.2020.109928
- Scalabrini, A., Mucci,  C., and  Northoff,  G.  (2018). Is our  self related to personality?  A  Neuropsychodynamic  model. Front.  Hum.  Neurosci. 12:346. doi:  10.3389/fnhum.2018.00346
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Vai,  B.,  Poletti,  S.,  Damiani,  S.,  Mucci,  C.,  Colombo,  C.,  et  al. (2020a). All roads lead to the default-mode network-global source of DMN abnormalities  in  major  depressive  disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 45, 2058-2069.  doi:  10.1038/s41386-020-0785-x
- Scalabrini,  A.,  Xu,  J.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2021).  What  COVID-19  tells  us  about the self:  The  deep  intersubjective  and  cultural  layers  of  our  brain. Psychiatry Clin.  Neurosci. 75,  37-45.  doi:  10.1111/pcn.13185
- Schacter,  D.  L.,  Addis,  D.  R.,  Hassabis,  D.,  Martin,  V .  C.,  Spreng,  R.  N.,  and Szpunar,  K.  K.  (2012).  The  future  of  memory:  remembering,  imagining, and  the  brain. Neuron 76,  677-694.  doi:  10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.001
- Schilbach,  L.  (2010).  A  second-person  approach  to  other  minds. Nat.  Rev. Neurosci. 11:449.  doi:  10.1038/nrn2805-c1

- Seth,  A.  K.  (2015).  Neural  coding:  rate  and  time  codes  work  together. Curr. Biol. 25,  R110-R113.  doi:  10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.043
- Smallwood, J., Bernhardt, B. C., Leech, R., Bzdok, D., Jefferies, E., and Margulies, D. S. (2021). The default mode network in cognition: a topographical perspective. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. , 22, 503-513. doi: 10.1038/s41583-021-00474-4
- Smallwood,  J.,  and  Schooler,  J.  W .  (2015).  The  science  of  mind  wandering: empirically  navigating  the  stream  of  consciousness. Annu.  Rev.  Psychol. 66, 487-518.  doi:  10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331
- Solms,  M.  (2015).  Reconsolidation:  turning  consciousness  into  memory. Behav. Brain  Sci. 38:e24.  doi:  10.1017/S0140525X14000296
- Solms,  M.  (2020).  New  project  for  a  scientific  psychology:  general  scheme. Neuropsychoanalysis 22,  5-35.  doi:  10.1080/15294145.2020.1833361
- Solms, M. (2021). The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness . United  States:  WW  Norton  and  Company.
- Solms,  M.,  and  Friston,  K.  (2018).  How  and  why  consciousness  arises:  some considerations from physics and physiology. J.  Conscious.  Stud. 25,  202-238.
- Spagnolo,  R.,  and  Northoff,  G.  (2021). The  Dynamic  Self  in  Psychoanalysis. Neuroscientific Foundations and Clinical Cases . New YorkRoutledge. doi:10.4324/9781003221876
- Strachey,  J.  (1961). Editor's  Introduction .  Germany:  Springer,  3-11.
- Tanabe,  S.,  Huang,  Z.,  Zhang,  J.,  Chen,  Y.,  Fogel,  S.,  Doyon,  J.,  et  al.  (2020). Altered global brain signal during physiologic, pharmacologic, and pathologic states of unconsciousness in humans and rats. Anesthesiology 132, 1392-1406. doi:  10.1097/ALN.0000000000003197
- Tsakiris,  M.  (2017).  The  multisensory  basis  of  the  self:  From  body  to  identity to others. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 70, 597-609. doi: 10.1080/17470218.2016.1181768 3:516.  doi:
- Wiest,  G.  (2012).  Neural  and  mental  hierarchies. Front.  Psychol. 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00516
- Wolff, A., Di Giovanni, D. A., Gómez-Pilar, J., Nakao, T., Huang, Z., Longtin, A., et  al.  (2019).  The  temporal  signature  of  self:  temporal  measures  of  restingstate  EEG  predict  self-consciousness. Hum.  Brain  Mapp. 40,  789-803.  doi: 10.1002/hbm.24412
- Yeshurun,  Y.,  Nguyen,  M.,  and  Hasson,  U.  (2021).  The  default  mode  network: where the idiosyncratic self meets the shared social world. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 22,  181-192.  doi:  10.1038/s41583-020-00420-w
- Zhang, J., Huang, Z., Tumati, S., and Northoff, G. (2020). Rest-task modulation of fMRI-derived global signal topography is mediated by transient coactivation patterns. PLoS  Biol. 18:e3000733.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pbio.3000733

Conflict  of  Interest: The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  financial  relationships  that  could  be  construed as  a  potential  conflict  of  interest.

Publisher's  Note: All  claims  expressed  in  this  article  are  solely  those  of  the authors  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  their  affiliated  organizations, or  those  of  the  publisher,  the  editors  and  the  reviewers.  Any  product  that  may be  evaluated  in  this  article,  or  claim  that  may  be  made  by  its  manufacturer,  is not  guaranteed  or  endorsed  by  the  publisher.

Copyright © 2021 Northoff and Scalabrini. This is an open-access article distributed under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  License  (CC  BY).  The use,  distribution  or  reproduction  in  other  forums  is  permitted,  provided  the original  author(s)  and  the  copyright  owner(s)  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  is  permitted  which  does  not  comply  with these  terms.