<!-- image -->

## Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy

ISSN: 1465-6566 (Print) 1744-7666 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ieop20

## Pharmacotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity (ADHD) disorder with comorbid substance-use disorder (SUD)

Giulio Perugi, Alessandro Pallucchini, Salvatore Rizzato, Pietro De Rossi, Gabriele Sani, Angelo GI Maremmani, Vito Pinzone &amp; Icro Maremmani

To cite this article: Giulio Perugi, Alessandro Pallucchini, Salvatore Rizzato, Pietro De Rossi, Gabriele Sani, Angelo GI Maremmani, Vito Pinzone &amp; Icro Maremmani (2019) Pharmacotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity (ADHD) disorder with comorbid substance-use disorder (SUD), Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 20:3, 343-355, DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2018.1551878

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2018.1551878

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 04 Dec 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1272

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 16 View citing articles

<!-- image -->

## REVIEW

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Pharmacotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity (ADHD) disorder with comorbid substance-use disorder (SUD)

Giulio Perugi a , Alessandro Pallucchini a , Salvatore Rizzato b , Pietro De Rossi c,d,e,f , Gabriele Sani c,d,e , Angelo GI Maremmani g , Vito Pinzone b and Icro Maremmani a a Department of Experimental and Clinic Medicine, Section of Psychiatry, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; b Psychiatry Residency Training Program, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy; c NESMOS Department (Neurosciences, Mental Health, and Sensory Organs), Sapienza University of Rome; d School of Medicine and Psychology, Sant ' Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy; e Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy; f ASL Roma 5, Rome, Italy; g Dipartimento di Psichiatria, Unità Sanitaria della Toscana nordoccidentale, Zona della Versilia, Viareggio, Italia

## ABSTRACT

Introduction : Substance use disorder (SUD) is very common amongst patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The two disorders share partially overlapping features and SUD in ADHD is characterized by an early age of onset, high likelihood of poly-substance use, increased risk of suicide attempts, more hospitalizations, and scarce treatment adherence.

Areas covered : This paper reviews randomized active comparator-controlled or placebo-controlled trials evaluating the use of pharmacotherapy in patients with ADHD and SUD. The authors include open label and observational studies.

Expert opinion : Stimulant and non-stimulant treatments should be used to aid ADHD symptomatology in patients with SUD. SUD seems to be less responsive, suggesting a relative independence of the two conditions. For this reason, the association of ADHD-specific drugs and SUD-treatments should be recommended in a large proportion of patients suffering from both disorders. The rate and the quality of ADHD response to specific pharmacological treatments is highly variable, depending on the dose and the duration of the treatment, the age of the patient, and the severity and the chronicity of addiction. Further research is necessary to explore the divergences in treatment response of different ADHD subtypes in different subtypes of SUD.

## 1. Introduction

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined in DSM-5 as ' a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development ' . ADHD in adults should not be viewed as a distinct condition, but rather a continuation of the childhood disorder. Despite some populations study point out the possibility that idiopathic ADHD arises in adulthood [1 -3], other authors suggested that cases of apparent adult-onset ADHD may have had undiagnosed ADHD or subthreshold ADHD in youth [4]. More evidence is needed to confirm the validity of adult-onset ADHD as a distinct condition. For this reason, the DSM criteria are similar in the adulthood and in the childhood, although some adjustments should be made for adults. In general, there is a change away from the more externally observable symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity that are prevalent in children, toward the internalizing symptoms of inner restlessness, inattention, mood lability, and emotional dysregulation that become prevalent in adults [5,6]. In some cases, however, both sets of symptoms can be prominent throughout the life span.

In DSM-5, ADHD criteria have been modified respect to DSM-IV reflecting the growing knowledge of the disorder

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 22 May 2018 Accepted 21 November 2018

## KEYWORDS

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; substance use disorders; non stimulant drugs; simulant drugs and its possible diagnosis in adults. However, things get greatly complicated in adults with symptoms of ADHD associated with mood instability, personality dysfunctions, behavioral and drug addictions. In particular, based on clinical experience and data, Substance Use Disorders (SUDs) and ADHD share some important symptoms, such as impulsivity, mood instability, emotional dysregulation, and difficulty in modulating reward and gratification [7,8].

The prevalence rates of ADHD in adulthood are between 2 and 6% [9]. Among these individuals the co-occurrence of other psychiatric disorders is frequent, in particular SUDs (40 -50%) anxiety disorders (20 -25%), and mood disorders (15 -20%) [10 -12] are common comorbidities. ADHD is seen in around 10.8% of adult patients with SUDs [12,13]. The comorbidity between drug addiction and ADHD is associated with an earlier age at the onset of substance use and a higher likelihood of use of a variety of substances [14,15]. Other studies have found that ADHD in individuals with SUDs is associated with increased likelihood of suicide attempts, more hospitalizations, less likelihood of achieving abstinence, and lower rates of treatment adherence [16 -18].

Prospective studies also show that the risk of SUDs is a persisting concern in ADHD [19,20]. In a longitudinal study,

<!-- image -->

## Article highlights

- The treatment options for adults patients with co-occurring ADHD and SUD are scarce; however the recognition and treatment of these subjects remain a challenge.
- The efficacy of drug therapy also remains a challenge, with very few studies conducted.
- The tolerability and side effects of drugs must be taken into consideration, as this has a major impact on patient safety.
- Drugs of abuse often modify ADHD, worsening both the clinical picture and the outcome.
- There is an increasing need for new, more targeted treatments with alternative working mechanisms for ADHD and SUD.

This box summarizes key points contained in the article.

the diagnosis of ADHD in adolescence has been associated with a possible development of SUDs in 20s and 30s [21]. The most common drugs used in these patients were alcohol and/ or nicotine, cannabis, stimulant (amphetamine and cocaine), and opiates [22,23].

The relationship between ADHD and SUDs is based at least on three mechanisms. First, known risk factors for substance abuse disorders such as impulsivity and sensation seeking behavior are also common features of ADHD. Likewise, impaired executive functioning and poor judgment may lead individuals with ADHD to trying substances, increasing the vulnerability to developing addiction when compared to their peers without ADHD. Secondly, subjects with ADHD frequently reported difficulties in delaying or modulating reward response, with strong tendency to the development of multiple addictive behaviors. In this regard, ADHD and SUDs individuals have a tendency toward seeking immediate rewards or avoiding aversive stimuli. In other words, patients with ADHD result more or less impaired in self-control , the ability to choose an action NOW (planning and mentalization) to avoid a LATER consequence [24]. Thirdly, ADHD is associated with an increased exposure to psychosocial risk factors including educational failure, adverse peer group influences, and earlier exposure to addictive drugs.

Regarding neurochemical basis, dopamine transmission is central in the current models of both ADHD and SUDs [25,26], with a strong impact on the various impulsivity components that contribute to Delay Discontinuation (DD). Neural circuits involved in impulsivity and reward share some connections that can contribute to explain the link between these two disorders. Delayed gratification, which occurs by optimizing the balance in the NOW vs LATER processes, is mediated by dopamine (DA) modulation in the bottom-up and top-down brain circuits. LATER processes require steady DA signaling in striatal and prefrontal regions to sustain effort as achieved by tonic DA firing, whereas NOW processes are predominantly driven by fast, sharp bursts of DA as achieved by phasic DA firing that drive attention to the salient stimulus [27,28]. These circuities are deficient in ADHD because of an alteration in dopaminergic transmission [29] and drugs of abuse, such as cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, ecstasy, nicotine, alcohol, opiates, and marijuana, are able to increase the dopaminergic transmission, especially in the nucleus accumbens, the main brain ' s reward center, with the possibility of reducing symptoms of inner, restlessness and inattention [30]. Stimulant medications operate against ADHD symptoms by increasing synaptic dopamine concentrations in the striatum (which includes the nucleus accumbens) via presynaptic transporters [31].

Increasing evidences support the fact that treating ADHD symptoms during childhood or adolescence with stimulant medications may reduce the risk of developing SUDs in adulthood [32 -35]. Also, this therapeutic approach has been associated with a reduction of 85% of developing SUDs at early ages [36,37]. Concerning the treatment of ADHD in adult patients with SUDs, there are no conclusive studies about the true efficacy of the different drugs (stimulants vs non stimulants) even if there is little evidence that non-stimulant medications would be less efficacious but more safe than stimulants [38].

## 2. Areas covered

We used the PubMed and SCOPUS interface to search MEDLINE to identify randomized active comparator-controlled or placebo-controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating the use of pharmacotherapy in patients with co-occurring ADHD and SUD as monotherapy or in combination therapy. The terms ADHD/ SUD/cocaine disorder/stimulant use disorder/opioid use disorder/cannabis use disorder, and alcohol use disorder were combined with stimulant drugs, non stimulant drugs, methylphenidate (MPH), bupropion, amphetamine/methamphetamine, atomoxetine, methadone, modafinil, Δ -9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Studies were identified by the researches that go approximately from 2002 up to March 2017. We commented RCTs. However, we found only few RCTs on the use of stimulant and non-stimulant medications in patients with ADHD-SUD. Given the paucity of controlled data, we decided also to include information from open-label studies and caseseries and reports. Furthermore, reference lists from each article were assessed for additional citations of interest. We excluded articles in languages other than English. Two reviewers (A.P. and G.P.) evaluated the results of the search on the basis of title and/or abstract and assessed them for the suitability for inclusion on the basis of full publications.

In total, 6 RCTs, 13 randomized trials, 2 experimental imaging study, 6 meta-analysis, 4 longitudinal studies, 3 naturalistic studies, 2 cohorts studies, and 1 open-label study were selected for the review; 31 studies (7 with non-stimulant drugs) evaluated the efficacy of drug therapy on both ADHD and SUD symptoms [19,20,39 -67], 2 were neuroimaging studies and evaluated the effect on dopamine transporter [68,69], 4 evaluated the effect on psychopathological dimensions associated with ADHD [70 -73].

## 3. Treatment in patients with co-occurring ADHD and cocaine and other stimulant use disorder

## 3.1. Stimulant medications

Although several recent studies [39,40] did not show differences between MPH and placebo in the treatment of ADHD or SUD in patients with both diagnoses, two published controlled trials in adolescents with ADHD and SUD (including cocaine dependence) found pemoline [41] and MPH -spheroidal oral drug absorption system (MPH-SODAS) [42] to be more efficacious than placebo for

ADHD symptomatology, but not for SUD. The two studies included, respectively, 69 (58 males, 11 females) and 16 (males) adolescents. MPH did not exceed the dose of 40 mg/day. In the same line, a 12-week randomized, controlled trial, comparing bupropion (max 400 mg/day), MPH (max 40 mg/day), and placebo in 98 methadone-maintained adults with ADHD and cocaine addiction [39], reported reduced ADHD symptoms in all three groups with no differences in the final outcome, without clear advantage over placebo, in reducing cocaine use. Another doubleblind, placebo controlled study has been conducted in a sample of over 300 adolescents aged 14 -18 with ADHD and SUD [43] treated with osmotic release oral system (OROS) MPH and cognitive behavioral therapy. Both groups improved on ADHD and SUD measures, although there were no differences in the reported number of days with substance use the in past month.

More recent studies [44,45], however, showed significant improvement in both ADHD symptoms and SUD using higher stimulant doses than those used in earlier studies. The dose of MPH prescribed in subjects with both ADHD and SUD was about 40% higher (approximately 90 mg/day) than the dose prescribed in individuals with ADHD only [46,47]. A doubleblind, randomized, placebo-controlled study, assessed the feasibility, safety and efficacy of MPH and cognitive behavioral group therapy (CBGT) in 62 cocaine-dependent patients [48]. Patients were randomly assigned to four treatment arms to receive MPH (max 60 mg/day) or placebo combined with either CBGT or treatment as usual for 12 weeks. There was a significant decline in self-reported amount and frequency of cocaine use in all groups, but data did not show significant changes in cocaine-free urine samples. This study does not support a role for MPH and CBGT in the treatment of cocaine dependence in this group of patients.

In another randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial [40], the efficacy of sustained-release MPH was compared to placebo in 106, predominately males, cocaine abusers with ADHD. In the MPH group, the likelihood of cocaine-positive urine samples decreased by 36% over time in ADHD responders compared to less than 10% in ADHD non-responders, suggesting a beneficial effect of MPH in this group. Finally, Collins et al. [49] assessed in a sample of cocaine abusers with (N = 7) and without ADHD (N = 7) the efficacy of MPH on the perception of the cocaine effect and on the relief ADHD symptom. The response to cocaine was not different between cocaine users with or without ADHD. However, the highest dosage of sustained-release MPH (40 or 60 mg), produced the lowest increase of ' good drug effect, ' suggesting an interaction of MPH with craving for cocaine.

A double-blind placebo-controlled study aimed to verify the efficacy of a pharmacological treatment in 24 adult patients with ADHD with amphetamine dependence [50] did not find significant differences between osmotic-release oral system (OROS) MPH and placebo. Although ADHD symptoms decreased in both groups, no significant differences were observed in symptoms improvement or for any of variables related to the addictive disorder (e.g. use, craving, time to relapse, cumulative abstinence duration). On the contrary, in a study that investigates the efficacy of MPH as a substitution therapy for amphetamine/methamphetamine

(MA) addiction, a positive response of drug use and addiction was reported. The design of the study was randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled with sustained-release MPH (MPH-SR) or placebo for 10 weeks (active phase) followed by 4 weeks of single-blind [74]. ADHD was observed at baseline in 32.7%, and 25.5% of patients in the MPH and placebo groups, respectively. The MPH group, reduced MA use from baseline to end of the active phase significantly more than the placebo group, especially in those who had a severe SUD. Treatment groups also differed in self-reported MA craving assessed at weeks 10 and 14, with the placebo group reporting significantly greater craving than MPH group.

## 3.1.1. Non-stimulant medication

Arandomized double-blind trial compared atomoxetine (ATX) and placebo in 70 adolescents with ADHD and SUDs (including cocaine use). Both groups received motivational interviewing/cognitive behavioral therapy (MI/CBT) for SUDs [51]. No difference between the ATX and placebo was observed. In another 12-week singleblind trial [52], 11 patients with adult ADHD and cocaine dependence were treated with divided daily doses (three times a day) of bupropion. Patients were stabilized on 250 -400 mg/day of bupropion based on clinical efficacy and side effects. They reported significant reductions in attention difficulties, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Self-reported cocaine use, cocaine craving, and cocaine positive toxicology, also decreased significantly. However in a subsequent double-blind comparison of MPH, bupropion and placebo [39], no advantage of drugs versus placebo and between the two drugs in reducing cocaine use were reported.

## 3.1.2. Discussion patients with co-occurring ADHD and stimulant use disorder

The results of the treatment trials in patients with co-occurring ADHD and stimulant use disorder are mixed, and currently do not support specific, aggressive treatment of ADHD in all these patients. In particular the efficacy of stimulant and nonstimulant medications on SUDs symptomatology seems to be scarce. More favorable results have been shown on ADHD symptomatology. Clearly, there are several limitations such as the inclusion of chronic populations, the choice of the agent and the formulations, the high levels of dropouts, and inadequate dose and duration of the treatment. In adult populations, moreover, the frequent comorbidity with other mental disorders such as mood and anxiety disorders may further limit the effectiveness of the treatments.

The relative absence of abuse of stimulant medication or worsening of the SUDs in this population is reassuring. In this regard, ATX does not seem to be associated with abuse behaviors, probably because in vivo ATX specifically increases extracellular levels of dopamine (DA) in the prefrontal cortex but not the striatum (including nucleus accumbens). However, data to evaluate the effectiveness of non-stimulant medications in this population are still insufficient and clearly not adequate.

Overall, the clinical studies assessing the potential utility of MPH as an agonist treatment for stimulants dependence are inconclusive. This could be explained by lower baseline striatal dopamine transporters (DAT) availability in ADHD with stimulant dependence compared to the other ADHD patients. In the

caudate nucleus, MPH treatment resulted in lower DAT occupancy in ADHD with stimulant addiction patients compared to ADHD patients without stimulant addiction and the effect was not dependent on MPH plasma levels [68]. Studies in chronic cocaine users have found decreased DAT binding sites compared to non-drug using controls [69]. Another possible explanation is that medication leaks away through the blood -brain barrier (BBB) in ADHD patients with cocaine addiction due to alterations of the BBB from previous cocaine use [75,76]. However, length of abstinence was not correlated with occupancy of MPH to DAT, indicating that possible brain alterations may be long-lasting [53].

In order to achieve optimal control of ADHD symptom, some patients may benefit from high doses of MPH and prolonged administration [54]. Because of the cocaine users ' decreased sensitivity to dopaminergic medications, the duration of treatment and the time point of treatment initiation should be considered critical determinants for effectiveness. Time to maximal reduction in cocaine use can vary considerably and can be prolonged for several months.

Brain imaging data suggest that MPH may improve various neural dysfunctions in mesocorticolimbic regions, including neurocognitive deficits associated with the consumption of cocaine and stimulant [55,56,77,78]. It is interesting to note that medications which block dopamine uptake, acting on DAT, inhibited dopamine efflux induced by methamphetamine. It ' s known that amphetamine/methamphetamine displacement of intracellular DA opens channel and spills out DA into the synapse. In addition, high levels of dopamine into synapse, reverses dopamine transports out of the cells. A recent study [79] suggests that more strongly a drug antagonizes the release of dopamine by methamphetamine, the greater is its block on the DAT.

## 3.2. Treatment in patients with co-occurring ADHD and opioid use disorder

The use of central stimulant medication in adults with ADHD who receive opioid maintenance treatment remains controversial and empirical evidence is limited. A 12 weeks double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, three-arm clinical trial compared MPH and sustained-release bupropion to placebo in 98 methadone-maintained patients. All these individuals showed DSM criteria for adult ADHD with the exclusion of other current mental disorders. Of the entire sample, more than half also show cocaine dependence or abuse. In addition to drug therapy and treatment as usual in the methadone program, all patients were receiving individual cognitive behavior psychotherapy. All participants were on the same dose of methadone for at least 3 weeks (methadone mean dose ranged from 81 to 87 mg/day in the three groups). Sustained-release MPH and sustained-release bupropion dose were ranging from 40 to 80 mg/day and from 200 to 400 mg/day, respectively. The three groups had a reduction in symptoms of ADHD and no differences in opioid use were observed. The placebo group was also associated with improved symptoms comparable to the groups treated with MPH or bupropion. The authors concluded that treatment with MPH or bupropion had no clear advantages over placebo with regard to symptoms of ADHD in patients on methadone maintenance treatment [39].

Two naturalistic studies were conducted on the effects of combined treatment of opioid dependence and ADHD. In the first, a total of 12 patients were included after 6 months of treatment with opioid maintenance and stimulating drugs. Treatment of ADHD includes both pharmacological and nonpharmacological strategies. Central stimulants, such as dexamphetamine and MPH were the first choice. In this sample only one individual was medicated with modafinil 200 mg daily, while the others had MPH with average dose of 72 mg/day. Half of the patients were stabilized on methadone, at an average daily dose of 107 mg, range 60 -130 mg/day. The other half had prescriptions for buprenorphine, with an average daily dose of 20 mg, and a range of 16 -32 mg/day. Most of them were in methadone treatment when assessed for ADHD, but two individuals were started simultaneously on both treatments; a third was first started on central stimulants treatment, after which methadone treatment was added. A reduction in both opioid use and ADHD symptoms was reported [57].

In the second naturalistic study, 20 stabilized patients in opioid maintenance treatment (OMT) (mean of 14.5 months in treatment) with ADHD received long-acting MPH (95%) and dextroamphetamine (5%). Of these 20 ADHD-OMT individuals, 50% show another stimulants dependence and 60% have no additional diagnosis (beyond substance use). Regarding to OMT, 75% were on buprenorphine and 25% were on methadone treatment (no daily dosages were available). Monitoring occurred at baseline, at 2 months (after patients being stabilized on the central stimulant), and again at 3, 6 and 24 months. Patients reported significantly fewer symptoms of ADHD at the 6- to 8-week point. Even if ADHD scores dropped significantly during treatment, the scores still remained fairly high, suggesting persistent functional impairment [58].

## 3.2.1. Discussion patients with co-occurring ADHD and opioid use disorder

Although the growing interest on the issue of SUD in ADHD individuals, only few studies investigate the comorbidity with opioid use disorder. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials are needed. The only preliminary evidence currently available [39] suggests that neither MPH nor bupropion have clear advantages over placebo in the management of ADHD symptoms in patients under methadone maintenance treatment. The studied sample included more than 50% individuals with comorbid cocaine abuse or dependence. This observation is of extreme interest and it reflects the real world practice, in which clinicians are facing with polyabuse and poly-addictions rather than specific addiction [80]. Moreover, addiction would be better considered as a dynamic path into toxicomanic progression, in which polyaddictions could be considered the final stage [81 -83], highlighting the crucial importance of early diagnosis and early treatment for SUD and predisposing conditions such as ADHD.

There is no clear evidence regarding timing of initiation of specific treatments. The majority of the studies abovementioned [39,57,58] seem to indicate that the co-medication

with ADHD treatment should be started after stabilization in OMT. While methadone maintenance treatment is the most widely administered medicine for medication-assisted treatment of opioid use disorder across the globe [84], a great part of addiction medicine specialists still preferred detoxifying programs [81] and tend to under medicate patients in opioid treatment program [85]. Thus, using proper methodology and recommended dosages are critical [86,87]. Moreover, there is a debate regarding enhancement methadone dosage to ' overstandard ' (e.g. &gt;120mg/die) in the case of comorbidity with other mental disorders and/or dual diagnosis [88 -92] or with substance use (e.g. stimulants) [93]. In this light, the need to increase therapeutic opioid dosages in individuals with ADHD is an option that deserves to be taken into account. Finally, outcome in clinical trials and observational study are limited in time (e.g. 12 weeks) [39,57]. Facing with chronic diseases, follow up studies exploring the long-term outcome are recommended.

## 3.3. Treatment in patients with co-occurring ADHD and cannabis use disorder (CUD)

Cannabis is the world ' s most widely produced and consumed illicit drug [94]. The number of cannabis users globally is estimated to range between 2.8 and 5.8% of the world ' s population [94]. Starting use of cannabis in adolescence, associated with long-term or heavy cannabis use has also been associated with altered brain development, poor educational outcome, cognitive impairment [95], and diminished quality of life [96].

ADHD and CUD appear to be strongly correlated. In a clinical trial on 600 adolescents seeking outpatient services for marijuana disorders, the subjects had high risk for concomitant psychiatric conditions and 77% had ADHD. Data from a large meta-analysis of 27 studies included more than 4,000 individuals with ADHD and almost 7,000 controls, showed that individuals with ADHD had a 2.8-fold increased risk of cannabis abuse and a 1.7-fold increased risk of alcohol abuse [20].

Though further investigations are needed in the field, the endocannabinoid (eCB) system seems to have a role in a variety of neurobiological, behavioral and psychopathological aspects related to ADHD. Some fMRI findings demonstrate the role of eCB system in modulate areas associated with executive function [97 -99]. For example less deactivation of Default Mode Network (DMN) was correlated with a poorer performance after THC administration to healthy subjects and patients with ADHD showed less suppression of the activity of DMN in some tasks [100]. Furthermore some results indicate that THC administration predominantly reduces the effect of feedback in situ ations where there is the possibility to earn a reward and suggest involvement of the eCB system in appreciation of a received reward and plan a delay reward [101]. So the eCB system may be relevant in feedback processing for disorders in which appreciation of natural rewards may be affected, such as addiction and ADHD [24].

Some ADHD presentations has been associated with different aspects of cannabis- related problems and different risk of cannabis use than others. Inattentive dimension seems to be associated with more severe marijuana abuse, while hyperactive-impulsive dimension may be related with starting cannabis use at earlier ages [70]. These differences could be in part associated with gender. A study on three populationbased twin samples (N = 3762), including one oversampling females with ADHD, was conducted to evaluate whether the association of childhood ADHD and adolescent alcohol and marijuana involvement differ by gender [71]. Both male and female adolescents with more ADHD symptoms at baseline were more likely to initiate use earlier, with progression to heavier, more frequent use and symptoms of SUDs by age 17. Larger effects of hyperactivity-impulsivity on alcohol consumption and marijuana frequency were observed in female than male adolescents.

## 3.3.1. Non-stimulant medication

One double-blind, placebocontrolled trial evaluated the effects of ATX (up to 100 mg/day) on marijuana use in 38 adult patients with ADHD and comorbid cannabis use disorder. Results found no efficacy in reducing marijuana use though an improvement in ADHD symptoms was found on Clinical Global Impression-Improvement scale compared to placebo [59]. Another very recent controlled clinical trial in a sample of 19 adult males with ADHD with cannabis dependence treated with ATX [102] found that ADHD does not influence cannabis withdrawal. The study reported that 96% of subjects showed ≥ 1 cannabis withdrawal symptom and only 30% met DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for cannabis withdrawal syndrome. This observation suggests a relative independence of the two symptomatological patterns.

## 3.3.2. Stimulant medication

The utilization of stimulants in treatment of ADHD in patients with cannabis-related problems has not been investigated in RCT.

Treatment of ADHD and comorbid cocaine use with extended release mixed amphetamine salts (MAS-XR) has been shown to be associated with increased weekly abstinence from marijuana, but not with a decrease in the proportion of marijuana using days per week [60]. Aharonovich et al. [61] evaluated the effects of cannabis use on treatment retention and abstinence from cocaine in patients with cocaine addiction and ADHD. Their analysis was realized using a subset (n = 92) of the subjects participating in a 14-week placebo-controlled trial designed to investigate the role of MPH on cocaine addiction in patients with ADHD. Moderate/ intermittent cannabis users had greater retention rates compared to abstainers and heavy users. The authors provide no clear explanation for this unexpected result. In our opinion, this could be due to the fact that heavy cannabis use may reduce response to MPH [103], but moderate use may lead to improvement in hyperactivity, impulsivity and restlessness by a general calming effect of cannabis.

Recently, a pilot randomized placebo-controlled study of a cannabinoid medication, Sativex Oromucosal Spray, in 30 adults with ADHD did not show no statistically significant improvement in both active treatment and placebo arms [62]. As for ADHD symptoms, significant improvements were found only for hyperactivity/impulsivity and trend toward

improvement was found for inattention and emotional lability, these statistical differences disappeared after adjustment for multiple testing. The authors speculated that these results could be related to the relatively low dose utilized and suggested that pharmaceutical formulations of cannabinoids could anyway potentially provide safe alternatives to the use of street cannabis for some individuals with ADHD.

## 3.3.3. Discussion patients with co-occurring ADHD and CUD

The available data on the effect of stimulant and nonstimulant medication in patients with comorbid ADHD and CUD should be considered inadequate. Very preliminary evidence suggests scarce efficacy of ATX and MPH in reducing cannabinoids use independently from the improvement in adults with ADHD [59,61]. So the question whether treatment of comorbid ADHD and CUD with stimulants may reduce cannabinoids craving and/or use needs future inquiry. Recently, an increasing amount of data show worse outcome of ADHD trajectories in adolescents with early cannabis use [104]. For instance regular cannabis use starting before age 16 may have poorer executive functioning (i.e., decision-making, working memory, and response inhibition), than users who began later [105]. The evidence that stimulant treatment of ADHD in youths may also reduce the risk of developing SUD [33,63], strongly suggests that early onset of treatment could be a protective factor also for CUD [63,72].

## 3.4. Treatment in patients with co-occurring ADHD and alcohol use disorder

According to two well-known meta-analytic studies, childhood ADHD represents a risk factor for the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD) in adulthood, with an aggregated oddratio of 1.74 across 11 longitudinal studies following children with ADHD into adulthood [19,20]. The age of drinking initiation is significantly lower in adolescents with ADHD [106]. The concomitant presence of conduct disorders seems to play a key-role in increasing the risk of alcohol misuse in patients with persistent ADHD [107,108]. However, this association is not always confirmed.

The prevalence rate of AUD is higher among adults with ADHD compared to non-ADHD individuals [19,73]. Likewise, the prevalence of ADHD in AUD patients is also high [109], although results are inconsistent. In a recent study [110] conducted on a sample of 415 patients with AUD, the estimated ADHD prevalence was 20.5%.

The association of both inattentive and impulsive symptoms with AUD has been widely investigated. In a 25-years follow up study [111] on 1265 children with ADHD, alcohol dependence was developed by 16.6% of patients with mild attention difficulties and by the 33.3% of those with severe attention difficulties. On the other hand, the role of impulsivity, a key symptom in ADHD, is more complex, and there is an association between impulsivity and binge drinking, younger onset of age drinking and risk of relapse in abstinent alcoholics [112 -114]. Attentive inhibition deficits have been related to the quantity of alcohol consumption in patients with ADHD compared to controls [115]. These results are consistent with previous studies showing the contribution of attentive processes to the risk of alcohol abuse [116,117].

## 3.4.1. Non stimulant medication

Treatment with ATX, in a 12 weeks parallel double-blind controlled trial of 80 adults patients, showed a significant decrease of both ADHD symptoms (p = 0.007; effect size = 0.48) and heavy drinking days by 26% (p = 0.023) compared to placebo in recently abstinent adult with AUD. However, the overall effect of ATX on drinking behaviors was non-significant. The authors did not identify major safety or tolerability issues related to the ATX treatment and previous alcohol use. They also found a significant correlation between worsening of ADHD symptoms and relapse to alcohol abuse in the placebo group but not in the ATX group [64].

## 3.4.2. Stimulant medication

There are no clinical trials investigating the role of MPH in adult ADHD with comorbid AUD. However, MPH could have a role in decreasing the risk of developing AUD in young people with ADHD [65]. A clinical trial named ' Treatment of Patients With Alcoholism and Attention Deficit Disorder ' (id. NCT00261872) is in progress but no results have been published yet.

## 3.4.3. Discussion patients with co-occurring ADHD and alcohol use disorder

There are very few studies regarding the pharmacological options for the treatment of adult individuals with ADHD and comorbid AUD. Treatment of ADHD with ATX, seems to be a safe option associated with significant decrease of both ADHD symptoms and heavy drinking in abstinent adult with AUD. However, the overall effect of ATX on drinking behaviors was non-significant [64]. As regard stimulant drugs, MPH seems have a role in decreasing the risk of developing AUD in young people with ADHD [65]. However, the overall results of ADHD treatments on current drinking behaviors resulted scarcely effective.

## 4. Conclusion

Evidence from large open studies and controlled trials inpatients with SUD and co-morbid ADHD suggests that the drugs typically used in the treatment of adult ADHD, both for long acting and extended release preparations of stimulants and the non-stimulant ATX, offer promising though not conclusive efficacy results in the short term treatment of ADHD in patients with co-occurring SUD and ADHD. Despite the lack of long term studies, these drugs have an adequate tolerability profile in these patients. However, at the same time, the efficacy of these drugs is limited in SUD treatment. Nevertheless, the adequate tolerability profile of stimulant preparations and ATX, together with their favorable drug -drug interaction profile, suggest that these drugs are likely safe when used to treat patients with co-occurring SUDADHD. For a summary of important variables of each study assessing pharmacological treatment, see Table 1.

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Overview of randomized-controlled trials and observational studies on treatment in patients with co-occurring ADHD and SUD.

| scales Main findings Improvement in ADHD symptoms; no differences in marijuana use does not influence cannabis withdrawal   | ADHD Moderate/intermittent cannabis user influenced retention rates in the trial compared to abstainers and heavy users   | Amphetamine Salts-XR >PBO in weekly abstinence from marijuana    | Mixed No significant differences            | No significant differences                                                                                                                        | Reduction in cocaine use                                                                            | No significant differences                                                            | No significant differences                                                                                                              | No significant differences                                                                        | Reduction in risk for relapse to substance                                        | Reduction in cocaine use                                                                 | No significant differences.                                                                                             | Possible reduction in Cocaine craving (positive subjective effects) No significant differences                                                   | Reduction in Methamphetamine use and craving                                                         | No significant differences                                         | Reduction in cocaine use, craving and positive                      | toxicolgies No significant differences                          | Efficacy in subjects with more severe ADHD and more consistent response   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Comparators (dose) Main outcome Atomoxetine (up to 100 mg) vs Placebo WRAADS and CGI-I Atomoxetine                          | MJQQ Sustained-release methylphenidate (up to 40 mg) vs Proportion of cannabis-positive                                   | urines Amphetamine Salts-XR (60 or 80 mg) vs Placebo Self report | Atomoxetine (up to 100 mg) vs Placebo AISRS | Sustained-release methylphenidate (up to 80 mg) or sustained-release bupropion (up to 400 mg) vs Urinalysis, self-reports, retention in treatment | methadone (up to 87 mg) Sustained-release methylphenidate (up to 40 mg) vs AARS; CGI; TAADDS; urine | toxicology (up to 112,5 mg) vs Placebo CGI-S, DISC, CGI-I, CHI, CPRS, CIDI-SAM, urine | drug screens release oral system Methylphenidate vs Cognitive Behavioral Therapy K-SADS-E, CIDI, ADHD-RS, CGI-I, ARCQ, TLFB, urine drug | screens, MGH Diversion Questionnaire Methylphenidate Spheroidal Oral Drug Absorption SNAP-IV; CGI | vs Placebo release oral system Methylphenidate (up to vs Placebo Urine toxicology | Amphetamine Salts-XR (60 or 80 mg) vs Placebo Self-report and weekly urine screening (up | Methylphenidate to 30 mg) vs a placebo each combined with Cognitive Behavioral Group Therapy Urine samples, self-report | Methylphenidate (40 or 60 mg) and Cocaine (16 or mg/70 kg) vs Methylphenidate and Placebo VAS Methylphenidate (72 mg) Urine toxicology and self- | release oral system Placebo report Methylphenidate slow release (up to 54 mg) vs Placebo Self report | Atomoxetine (up to 100 mg) + Motivational Interviewing Self report | /Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (up to 400 mg) vs Placebo Self report | release oral system Methylphenidate (up to Self report; ADHD-RS | vs Placebo Amphetamine (up to 72 mg) vs Placebo Self report; ADHD-RS      |
| (week) 12                                                                                                                   | 12 14                                                                                                                     | 14                                                               | 12                                          | 12                                                                                                                                                | 14                                                                                                  | 12                                                                                    | 16                                                                                                                                      | 6                                                                                                 | 24                                                                                | 13                                                                                       | 12                                                                                                                      | 4 12                                                                                                                                             | 14                                                                                                   | 12                                                                 | 12                                                                  | 11                                                              | 11                                                                        |
| Patient type Cannabis dependence and ADHD                                                                                   | ADHD and Cannabis Dependence Cocaine Dependence, cannabis use and ADHD                                                    | Cocaine Dependence, cannabis use and ADHD                        | ADHD and alcohol abuse                      | and/or dependence Methadone-maintained patients with ADHD                                                                                         | Cocaine Dependence, ADHD                                                                            | cannabis use and CD, SUD and ADHD                                                     | ADHD and SUD                                                                                                                            | ADHD and SUD                                                                                      | ADHD and amphetamine dependence                                                   | ADHD and cocaine use disorder                                                            | Cocaine dependence (diacetylmorphine                                                                                    | maintenance) Cocaine abuse with and without ADHD                                                                                                 | 24 Amphetamine dependence and ADHD Methamphetamine                                                   | dependence ADHD and SUD                                            | Cocaine dependence and                                              | adult ADHD ADHD                                                 | ADHD                                                                      |
| (N) 46                                                                                                                      | 23 92                                                                                                                     | 57                                                               | 147                                         | 98                                                                                                                                                | 106                                                                                                 | 69                                                                                    | 300                                                                                                                                     | 16                                                                                                | 54                                                                                | 126 62                                                                                   |                                                                                                                         | 14                                                                                                                                               | 110                                                                                                  | 70                                                                 | 11                                                                  | 255                                                             | 255                                                                       |
| 2010 [59]                                                                                                                   | 2018 [102] 2006 [61]                                                                                                      | 2016 [60]                                                        | [64]                                        |                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                     |                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                   | [44]                                                                              | 2013                                                                                     |                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                      | [51]                                                               |                                                                     | [120]                                                           |                                                                           |
| Study McRae-Clark                                                                                                           | Chauchard Aharonovich                                                                                                     | Notzon                                                           | Wilens 2008                                 | Levin 2006 [39]                                                                                                                                   | Levin 2007 [40]                                                                                     | Riggs 2004 [41]                                                                       | Riggs 2011 [43]                                                                                                                         | Szobot 2008 [42]                                                                                  | Konstenius 2014                                                                   | Levin 2015 [45] Dursteler-MacFarland                                                     | [48] Collins 2006 [49]                                                                                                  | Konstenius 2010 [50]                                                                                                                             | Ling 2014 [74]                                                                                       | Thurstone 2010                                                     | Levin 2002 [52]                                                     | Winhusen 2010                                                   | *Nunes 2013 [121]                                                         |

)

Continued

(

<!-- image -->

Table 1. (Continued).

| Main findings       | Reduction in withdrawal Reduction in ADHD symptoms; No smoking reduction                                                                                                                                         | differences in Craving reduction Reduction in ADHD symptoms and Opioid use ASRS, Wender Utah Rating Scale   | no worsening cognitive performance in the active group; significant improvements for hyperactivity/ impulsivity and trends toward improvements for inattention and emotional lability. Impression of Improvement Scales; MJQQ = Marijuana Quit = Conduct Disorder; SUD = Substance Use Disorder; SNAP- Voor ADHD; QbTest = Quantitative Behavioral Test; Impairment Rating Scale Self Report   |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Main outcome scales | D- to Continuous Performance Task (CPT) and the Shiffman-Jarvik smoking withdrawal questionnaire Self report; CAARS Subjective measures of abstinence; neurocognitive tasks Clinical                             | interviews; self reports Dextroamphetamine; Methylphenidate; Methadone; b Buprenorphine                     | DIVA 2.0, CAARS, QbTest, WRAADS, SART, CNS-LS, ALS- SF, WFIRS-S CGI-I = Clinical Global Deficit Disorder Scale; CD DIVA = Diagnostisch Interview Form; WFIRS-S = Weiss Functional                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Comparators (dose)  | Dextroamphetamine (up to 30 mg); Amphetamine, Amphetamine Mixed Salts (up to 40 mg); Atomoxetine (up to 40 mg); Amphetamine (up 54 mg); Lisdexamfetamine (up to 30 mg) Lisdexamfetamine (up to 30 mg) vs Placebo | Atomoxetine (1.2 mg/kg) vs Placebo Methylphenidate (72 mg); (107 mg); Buprenorphine (20 mg) 24 months       | Spray (cannabinoid medication 1:1 Δ 9-THC/CBD). Adult Attention Deficit Disorder Scale; Scale; TAADDS = Targeted Adult Attention = Conners ' Adult ADHD Rating Scales; Scale; ALS-SF = Affective Lability Scale-Short                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Duration (week)     | 2 days 2                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Dextroamphetamine; Methadone to                                                                             | Sativex Oromucosal containing a Wender-Reimherr ADHD Rating Scale; CAARS Study Lability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Patient type        | - seeking                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 1 24 Obs up                                                                                                 | 6-week WRAADS = Scale; AARS = Adult = ADHD Rating for Neurologic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Patient (N)         | ADHD 32 ADHD                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Non treatment smokers 12 ADHD; Opioid Dependence 20 ADHD; Opioid Dependence                                 | ADHD Deficit Hyperactivity Dirsorder; Investigator Symptom Rating Pelham Questionnaire; ADHD-RS to Response Task; CNS-LS = Centre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                     | 15                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 50 in                                                                                                       | ADHD = Attention AISRS = ADHD Noland and Attention                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Study               | Gehricke 2011 [122] Kollins 2014 [123] Ray 2009 [124]                                                                                                                                                            | Blix 2009 [57] Abel 2014 [58] Reduction in ADHD symptoms; nor increase substance abuse                      | Cooper 2017 [62] Abbreviations: Questionnaire; IV = Swanson, SART = Sustained                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

## 5. Expert opinion

Diagnosing and treating adult ADHD and concomitant SUD still represents a clinical challenge. Similar pattern of symptoms characterized ADHD and SUD, representing a problem for the correct diagnosis. Substances use frequently results in attention difficulties, hyperactivity, and/or impulsivity, making the diagnosis of ADHD difficult or impossible to be distinguished from symptoms related to ongoing substance use.

In general, an active patient with SUDs should be treated (usually via referral to a mental health counselor or addiction specialist) before the beginning of a therapy against ADHD. However, for patients with well-documented ADHD that predates the onset of substance use, it may be reasonable to treat both disorders concurrently. Concerning non-pharmacological treatments, we agree with other authors that psychosocial interventions should be administrated in addition to pharmacotherapy in a multimodal strategy.

In order to prescribe an ADHD medication in a patient with a co-occurring SUD, a careful risk/benefit assessment must be conducted. If the patient is currently abusing of prescribed stimulants or there is a clear indication that the patient would misuse or divert stimulant medications, a possible resolution would be a long-acting formulation with a lower risk of misuse or diversion [118]. In order to treat this type of patient, it is also reasonable to consider the use of non-stimulant preparations, such as ATX, that should not be considered as potentially addictive [66].

The results of the treatment trials in patients with cooccurring ADHD and SUD do not support specific treatment of ADHD in all these patients. In particular, in our experience stimulant and non-stimulant medications seem to be scarcely effective on SUDs symptomatology and with the increasing of the patient ' s age and the duration of the SUD, even the response of ADHD is less pronounced.

Pharmacological treatments specifically targeting ADHD symptoms are usually effective on the component of substance use related to the so called ' self-treatment ' of ADHD symptoms, but not on craving and withdrawal symptoms [67]. This could, at least in part, explain the inconsistency of current evidence emerging from studies using ADHD-specific drugs for patients with concomitant SUD. More favorable results have been shown on ADHD symptomatology, though most patients need high doses of MPH and prolonged administration, in order to achieve optimal control of ADHD symptoms [54]. In fact, because of the decreased sensitivity of the dopamine system to the agonist medications, the time point of treatment initiation, the dose and the duration of treatment should be considered critical determinants for the achievement of a positive response in patients with comorbid ADHD and SUD.

The number of studies focusing on the treatment of ADHD in individuals with SUD is growing, however very few focused on specific substances. Most of the reports included more many users of multiple drugs. This probably reflects the real world practice in which many ADHD patients show polyabuse and poly-addictions rather than specific addiction.

Interestingly, preliminary evidence [39] suggest that treatment with stimulant and non stimulants drugs had no clear advantages over placebo with regard to ADHD symptoms, in patients treated with methadone maintenance treatment. This observation is consistent with our experience of a scarce utilization of stimulant and non stimulant drugs in this population. One possible explanation is that patients that benefit from methadone maintenance treatment usually show a personal history of chronic substance use, causing symptoms mimicking ADHD or worsening symptoms of preexisting ADHD. Therefore, in these patients the improvement in SUD may contribute to a better control of such symptoms as a corollary effect of the reduced drug use. On the other hand the chronicity of the addictive behavior may have reduced the sensitivity of the dopaminergic and noradrenergic systems of these subjects reducing the efficacy of ADHD specific drugs.

In spite of the increasing evidence of the important, epidemiological, clinical, and pathogenetic relationships between CUD and ADHD, to date very few studies have been focused on pharmacological treatment of these patients. Consistently with our experience, the available evidence suggests at least a partial efficacy of MPH and ATX on ADHD symptoms, without any effects on CUD. The preliminary data on the potential efficacy of cannabinoids in ADHD symptomatology are substantially negative. In our opinion, it would be more clinically appropriate to find suitable agonist/antagonist maintenance treatments for CUD rather than investigating potential anti-ADHD properties of cannabinoids. Furthermore, although it is generally recommended that patients with an active substance-use disorder should not be prescribed stimulants for ADHD [119], in our opinion pharmacologic treatment with stimulant drugs for ADHD with concomitant CUD disorder is warranted unless the patient is experiencing significant psychotic symptoms.

Regarding the pharmacological options for the treatment of adult individuals with ADHD and comorbid AUD, ATX and MPH seem to be safe options associated with significant decrease ADHD symptoms. In our experience, consistently with the existing evidence, the results of ADHD treatments on drinking behaviors resulted scarcely effective. For these reasons, the association of AUD-specific drugs (e.g. naltrexone, acamprosate etc.) and ADHD-specific drugs should be strongly recommended in patients suffering from both disorders.

To date, the few studies focused on the treatment of ADHD in patients with SUD suggest that stimulant and non-stimulant treatments may be used to aid ADHD symptomatology. SUD symptomatology seems to be less responsive, suggesting a relative independence of the two symptomatological patterns. The rate and the quality of ADHD response are, however, highly variable depending on the dose and the duration of the treatment (which depends on the severity of the patient), the age of the patient, and the severity and the duration of addiction. Eventual divergence in response of different ADHD subtypes in different subtypes of SUD deserves further explorations.

## Funding

This manuscript was not funded.

<!-- image -->

## Declaration of interest

The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

## Reviewer disclosures

Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.

## References

Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest ( · ) or of considerable interest ( ·· ) to readers.

1. Moffitt TE, Houts R, Asherson P, et al. Is adult ADHD a childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorder? Evidence from a four-decade longitudinal cohort study. Am J Psychiatry. 2015 Oct;172(10):967 -977. PubMed PMID: 25998281; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4591104.
2. Caye A, Rocha TB, Anselmi L, et al. Attention-deficit/Hyperactivity disorder trajectories from childhood to young adulthood: evidence from a birth cohort supporting a late-onset syndrome. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016 Jul 1;73(7):705 -712. PubMed PMID: 27192050.
3. Agnew-Blais JC, Polanczyk GV, Danese A, et al. Evaluation of the persistence, remission, and emergence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in young adulthood. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016 Jul 1;73(7):713 -720. PubMed PMID: 27192174; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC5475268.
4. Franke B, Michelini G, Asherson P, et al. Live fast, die young? A review on the developmental trajectories of ADHD across the lifespan. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2018 Sep 5. PubMed PMID: 30195575. DOI:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2018.08.001
5. Biederman J, Mick E, Faraone SV. Age-dependent decline of symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: impact of remission definition and symptom type. Am J Psychiatry. 2000 May;157 (5):816 -818. PubMed PMID: 10784477.
6. Larsson H, Lichtenstein P, Larsson JO. Genetic contributions to the development of ADHD subtypes from childhood to adolescence. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006 Aug;45(8):973 -981. PubMed PMID: 16865040.
7. Skirrow C, Asherson P. Emotional lability, comorbidity and impairment in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Affect Disord. 2013 May;147(1 -3):80 -86. PubMed PMID: 23218897.
8. Surman CB, Biederman J, Spencer T, et al. Understanding deficient emotional self-regulation in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a controlled study. Atten Defic Hyperact Disord. 2013 Sep;5(3):273 -281. PubMed PMID: 23413201; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4009378.
9. Weiss M, Murray C. Assessment and management of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults. CMAJ. 2003 Mar 18;168(6):715 -722. PubMed PMID: 12642429; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC154919.
10. Park S, Cho MJ, Chang SM, et al. Prevalence, correlates, and comorbidities of adult ADHD symptoms in Korea: results of the Korean epidemiologic catchment area study. Psychiatry Res. 2011 Apr 30;186(2 -3):378 -383. PubMed PMID: 20724004.
11. Pineiro-Dieguez B, Balanza-Martinez V, Garcia-Garcia P, et al. Psychiatric comorbidity at the time of diagnosis in adults with ADHD: the CAT study. J Atten Disord. 2016 Dec;20(12):1066 -1075. PubMed PMID: 24464326.
12. Kessler RC, Adler L, Barkley R, et al. The prevalence and correlates of adult ADHD in the United States: results from the national comorbidity survey replication. Am J Psychiatry. 2006 Apr;163(4):716 -723. PubMed PMID: 16585449; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2859678.
13. Simon N, Rolland B, Karila L. Methylphenidate in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorders. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(23): 3359 -3366. PubMed PMID: 26088112.
14. Wilens TE, Martelon M, Joshi G, et al. Does ADHD predict substance-use disorders? A 10-year follow-up study of young adults with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011 Jun;50(6):543 -553. PubMed PMID: 21621138; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3104208.
15. Horner BR, Scheibe KE. Prevalence and implications of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder among adolescents in treatment for substance abuse. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1997 Jan;36(1):30 -36. PubMed PMID: 9000778.
16. Arias AJ, Gelernter J, Chan G, et al. Correlates of co-occurring ADHD in drug-dependent subjects: prevalence and features of substance dependence and psychiatric disorders. Addict Behav. 2008 Sep; 33(9):1199 -1207. PubMed PMID: 18558465; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2532519.
17. Kooij JJ, Rosler M, Philipsen A, et al. Predictors and impact of non-adherence in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder receiving OROS methylphenidate: results from a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry. 2013 Jan 24;13:36. PubMed PMID: 23347693; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3577504.
18. Martinez-Raga J, Szerman N, Knecht C, et al. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and dual disorders. Educational needs for an underdiagnosed condition. Int J Adolesc Med Health. 2013; 25(3):231 -243. PubMed PMID: 23846135.
19. Charach A, Yeung E, Climans T, et al. Childhood attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and future substance use disorders: comparative meta-analyses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011 Jan;50(1):9 -21. PubMed PMID: 21156266.
20. Lee SS, Humphreys KL, Flory K, et al. Prospective association of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and substance use and abuse/dependence: a meta-analytic review. Clin Psychol Rev. 2011 Apr;31(3):328 -341. PubMed PMID: 21382538; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3180912.
21. Brook DW, Brook JS, Zhang C, et al. Association between attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adolescence and substance use disorders in adulthood. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010 Oct;164(10):930 -934. PubMed PMID: 20921350; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2951631.
22. Young JT, Carruthers S, Kaye S, et al. Comorbid attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorder complexity and chronicity in treatment-seeking adults. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2015 Nov;34(6):683 -693. PubMed PMID: 25790353.
23. Klassen LJ, Bilkey TS, Katzman MA, et al. Comorbid attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorder: treatment considerations. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2012 Sep;5(3):190 -198. PubMed PMID: 22571450.
24. Volkow ND, Baler RD. NOW vs LATER brain circuits: implications for obesity and addiction. Trends Neurosci. 2015 Jun;38(6):345 -352. PubMed PMID: 25959611
25. ·· Highlights common brain circuits.
25. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, et al. Imaging the effects of methylphenidate on brain dopamine: new model on its therapeutic actions for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2005 Jun 1;57(11):1410 -1415. PubMed PMID: 15950015.
26. Kalivas PW, Volkow ND. The neural basis of addiction: a pathology of motivation and choice. Am J Psychiatry. 2005 Aug;162(8): 1403 -1413. PubMed PMID: 16055761.
27. Volkow ND, Tomasi D, Wang GJ, et al. Stimulant-induced dopamine increases are markedly blunted in active cocaine abusers. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;19(9):1037 -1043. PubMed PMID: 24912491; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4827430.
28. Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Logan J, et al. Fast uptake and long-lasting binding of methamphetamine in the human brain: comparison with cocaine. Neuroimage. 2008 Dec;43(4):756 -763. PubMed PMID: 18708148; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2606665.
29. Dougherty DD, Bonab AA, Spencer TJ, et al. Dopamine transporter density in patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Lancet. 1999 Dec 1825;354(9196):2132 -2133. PubMed PMID: 10609822.

- Describes the alteration in the dopaminergic transmission in ADHD ptients.
30. Wilens TE, Adamson J, Sgambati S, et al. Do individuals with ADHD self-medicate with cigarettes and substances of abuse? Results from a controlled family study of ADHD. Am J Addict. 2007;16 Suppl 1:14 -21; quiz 22 -3. PubMed PMID: 17453603.
31. Greenhill LL, Halperin JM, Abikoff H. Stimulant medications. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1999 May;38(5):503 -512. PubMed PMID: 10230181.
32. Katusic SK, Barbaresi WJ, Colligan RC, et al. Psychostimulant treatment and risk for substance abuse among young adults with a history of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a population-based, birth cohort study. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2005 Oct;15(5): 764 -776. PubMed PMID: 16262593.
33. Groenman AP, Oosterlaan J, Rommelse NN, et al. Stimulant treatment for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and risk of developing substance use disorder. Br J Psychiatry. 2013 Aug;203(2): 112 -119. PubMed PMID: 23846996.
34. Wilens TE, Adamson J, Monuteaux MC, et al. Effect of prior stimulant treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder on subsequent risk for cigarette smoking and alcohol and drug use disorders in adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2008 Oct; 162(10):916 -921. PubMed PMID: 18838643; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2760975.
35. McCabe SE, Dickinson K, West BT, et al. Age of onset, duration, and type of medication therapy for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use during adolescence: a multi-cohort national study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016 Jun; 55(6):479 -486. PubMed PMID: 27238066; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4921895.
36. Biederman J, Wilens T, Mick E, et al. Pharmacotherapy of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder reduces risk for substance use disorder. Pediatrics. 1999 Aug;104(2):e20. PubMed PMID: 10429138.
37. Mannuzza S, Klein RG, Truong NL, et al. Age of methylphenidate treatment initiation in children with ADHD and later substance abuse: prospective follow-up into adulthood. Am J Psychiatry. 2008 May;165(5):604 -609. PubMed PMID: 18381904; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2967384.
38. Faraone SV, Glatt SJ. A comparison of the efficacy of medications for adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using meta-analysis of effect sizes. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;71(6):754 -763. PubMed PMID: 20051220
- Meta-analysis highlighting importance that non stimulant medications be less efficacious than stimulants.
39. Levin FR, Evans SM, Brooks DJ, et al. Treatment of methadone-maintained patients with adult ADHD: double-blind comparison of methylphenidate, bupropion and placebo. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2006 Feb 1;81(2):137 -148. PubMed PMID: 16102908.
40. Levin FR, Evans SM, Brooks DJ, et al. Treatment of cocaine dependent treatment seekers with adult ADHD: double-blind comparison of methylphenidate and placebo. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2007 Feb 23;87(1):20 -29. PubMed PMID: 16930863.
41. Riggs PD, Hall SK, Mikulich-Gilbertson SK, et al. A randomized controlled trial of pemoline for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in substance-abusing adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004 Apr;43(4):420 -429. PubMed PMID: 15187802.
42. Szobot CM, Rohde LA, Katz B, et al. A randomized crossover clinical study showing that methylphenidate-SODAS improves attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms in adolescents with substance use disorder. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2008 Mar;41(3): 250 -257. PubMed PMID: 18327433.
43. Riggs PD, Winhusen T, Davies RD, et al. Randomized controlled trial of osmotic-release methylphenidate with cognitive-behavioral therapy in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
- 2011 Sep;50(9):903 -914. PubMed PMID: 21871372; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3164797.
44. Konstenius M, Jayaram-Lindstrom N, Guterstam J, et al. Methylphenidate for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and drug relapse in criminal offenders with substance dependence: a 24-week randomized placebo-controlled trial. Addiction. 2014 Mar;109(3):440 -449. PubMed PMID: 24118269; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4226329.
45. Levin FR, Mariani JJ, Specker S, et al. Extended-release mixed amphetamine salts Vs placebo for comorbid adult attention-deficit/Hyperactivity disorder and cocaine use disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 Jun;72(6): 593 -602. PubMed PMID: 25887096; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4456227.
46. Cunill R, Castells X, Tobias A, et al. Pharmacological treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with co-morbid drug dependence. J Psychopharmacol. 2015 Jan;29(1):15 -23. PubMed PMID: 25142405.
47. Perez-Mana C, Castells X, Torrens M, et al. Efficacy of psychostimulant drugs for amphetamine abuse or dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Sep 2;9:CD009695. PubMed PMID: 23996457.
48. Dursteler-MacFarland KM, Farronato NS, Strasser J, et al. A randomized, controlled, pilot trial of methylphenidate and cognitive-behavioral group therapy for cocaine dependence in heroin prescription. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013 Feb;33(1): 104 -108. PubMed PMID: 23277248.
49. Collins SL, Levin FR, Foltin RW, et al. Response to cocaine, alone and in combination with methylphenidate, in cocaine abusers with ADHD. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2006 Apr 28;82(2):158 -167. PubMed PMID: 16213109.
50. Konstenius M, Jayaram-Lindstrom N, Beck O, et al. Sustained release methylphenidate for the treatment of ADHD in amphetamine abusers: a pilot study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2010 Apr 1;108 (1 -2):130 -133. PubMed PMID: 20015599.
51. Thurstone C, Riggs PD, Salomonsen-Sautel S, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of atomoxetine for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adolescents with substance use disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;49(6):573 -582. PubMed PMID: 20494267; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2876346.
52. Levin FR, Evans SM, McDowell DM, et al. Bupropion treatment for cocaine abuse and adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Addict Dis. 2002;21(2):1 -16. PubMed PMID: 11916368.
53. Castells X, Ramos-Quiroga JA, Rigau D, et al. Efficacy of methylphenidate for adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-regression analysis. CNS Drugs. 2011 Feb;25(2):157 -169. PubMed PMID: 21254791.
54. Skoglund C, Brandt L, D ' Onofrio B, et al. Methylphenidate doses in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and comorbid substance use disorders. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017 Nov;27(11): 1144 -1152. PubMed PMID: 28935267.
55. Carmack SA, Block CL, Howell KK, et al. Methylphenidate enhances acquisition and retention of spatial memory. Neurosci Lett. 2014 May 1;567:45 -50.
- ·· Suggest that MPH may improve various brain neural dysfunctions regions, improving cocaine dependence.
56. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Tomasi D, et al. Methylphenidate attenuates limbic brain inhibition after cocaine-cues exposure in cocaine abusers. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 9;5(7):e11509. PubMed PMID: 20634975; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2901385.
57. Blix O, Dalteg A, Nilsson P. Treatment of opioid dependence and ADHD/ADD with opioid maintenance and central stimulants. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2009;11(1):5 -14.
58. Abel KF, Bramness JG, Martinsen EW. Stimulant medication for ADHD in opioid maintenance treatment. PubMed PMID: 25392060 J Dual Diagn. 2014;101:32 -38.
59. McRae-Clark AL, Carter RE, Killeen TK, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of atomoxetine in marijuana-dependent individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Addict. 2010 Nov-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Dec;19(6):481 -489. PubMed PMID: 20958842; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3019094.

60. Notzon DP, Mariani JJ, Pavlicova M, et al. Mixed-amphetamine salts increase abstinence from marijuana in patients with co-occurring attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and cocaine dependence. Am J Addict. 2016 Dec;25(8):666 -672. PubMed PMID: 28051838; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC5435118.
61. Aharonovich E, Garawi F, Bisaga A, et al. Concurrent cannabis use during treatment for comorbid ADHD and cocaine dependence: effects on outcome. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2006;32(4):629 -635. PubMed PMID: 17127551.
62. Cooper RE, Williams E, Seegobin S, et al. Cannabinoids in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a randomised-controlled trial. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017 Aug;27(8):795 -808. PubMed PMID: 28576350.
63. Dalsgaard S, Mortensen PB, Frydenberg M, et al. ADHD, stimulant treatment in childhood and subsequent substance abuse in adulthood - a naturalistic long-term follow-up study. Addict Behav. 2014 Jan;39(1):325 -328. PubMed PMID: 24090624.
64. Wilens TE, Adler LA, Weiss MD, et al. Atomoxetine treatment of adults with ADHD and comorbid alcohol use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2008 Jul 1;96(1 -2):145 -154. PubMed PMID: 18403134.
65. Hammerness P, Petty C, Faraone SV, et al. Do stimulants reduce the risk for alcohol and substance use in youth with ADHD? A secondary analysis of a prospective, 24-month open-label study of osmotic-release methylphenidate. J Atten Disord. 2017 Jan;21(1): 71 -77. PubMed PMID: 23264367.
66. Mariani JJ, Levin FR. Treatment strategies for co-occurring ADHD and substance use disorders. Am J Addict. 2007;16 Suppl 1:45 -54; quiz 55 -6. PubMed PMID: 17453606; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2676785.
67. De Crescenzo F, Cortese S, Adamo N, et al. Pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment of adults with ADHD: a meta-review. Evid Based Ment Health. 2017 Feb;20(1):4 -11. PubMed PMID: 27993933.
68. Crunelle CL, van Den Brink W, Veltman DJ, et al. Low dopamine transporter occupancy by methylphenidate as a possible reason for reduced treatment effectiveness in ADHD patients with cocaine dependence. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Dec;23(12): 1714 -1723. PubMed PMID: 23731497.
10. ·· Highlighting that cocaine addicts have less efficacy than treatment with stimulant drugs.
69. Crits-Christoph P, Newberg A, Wintering N, et al. Dopamine transporter levels in cocaine dependent subjects. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2008 Nov 1;98(1 -2):70 -76. PubMed PMID: 18565692; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2564619.
70. Bidwell LC, Henry EA, Willcutt EG, et al. Childhood and current ADHD symptom dimensions are associated with more severe cannabis outcomes in college students. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014 Feb 1;135:88 -94. PubMed PMID: 24332802; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3904106.
71. Elkins IJ, Saunders GRB, Malone SM, et al. Associations between childhood ADHD, gender, and adolescent alcohol and marijuana involvement: a causally informative design. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018 Mar 1;184:33 -41. PubMed PMID: 29402677; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC5818293.
72. Steinhausen HC, Bisgaard C. Substance use disorders in association with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, co-morbid mental disorders, and medication in a nationwide sample. Eur Neuro psychopharmacol. 2014 Feb;24(2):232 -241. PubMed PMID: 24314850.
73. Wilens TE. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the substance use disorders: the nature of the relationship, subtypes at risk, and treatment issues. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2004 Jun; 27(2):283 -301. PubMed PMID: 15063998.
74. Ling W, Chang L, Hillhouse M, et al. Sustained-release methylphenidate in a randomized trial of treatment of methamphetamine use disorder. Addiction. 2014 Sep;109(9):1489 -1500. PubMed PMID: 24825486; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4127124.
75. Buch S, Yao H, Guo M, et al. Cocaine and HIV-1 interplay: molecular mechanisms of action and addiction. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2011 Dec;6(4):503 -515. PubMed PMID: 21766222; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3208732.
76. Sharma HS, Muresanu D, Sharma A, et al. Cocaine-induced breakdown of the blood-brain barrier and neurotoxicity. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2009;88:297 -334. PubMed PMID: 19897082.
77. Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. Oral methylphenidate normalizes cingulate activity and decreases impulsivity in cocaine addiction during an emotionally salient cognitive task. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Jan;36(1):366 -367. PubMed PMID: 21116260; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3055523.
78. Li CS, Morgan PT, Matuskey D, et al. Biological markers of the effects of intravenous methylphenidate on improving inhibitory control in cocaine-dependent patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 10;107(32):14455 -14459. PubMed PMID: 20660731; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2922598.
79. Simmler LD, Wandeler R, Liechti ME. Bupropion, methylphenidate, and 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone antagonize methamphetamineinduced efflux of dopamine according to their potencies as dopamine uptake inhibitors: implications for the treatment of methamphetamine dependence. BMC Res Notes. 2013 Jun 5;6:220.
80. Maremmani I, Agi M, Rugani F, et al. Clinical presentations of substance abuse in bipolar heroin addicts at time of treatment entry. Ann Gen Psychiatry. 2012 Sep 3;11(1):23. PubMed PMID: 22943591; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3473306. eng.
81. Maremmani AGI, Pacini M, Pani PP, et al. Possible trajectories of addictions: the role of bipolar spectrum. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2016;18(4):23 -32.
82. Maremmani I, Pacini M, Perugi G, et al. Cocaine abuse and the bipolar spectrum in 1090 heroin addicts: clinical observations and a proposed pathophysiologic model. J Affect Disord. 2008 Feb;106 (1 -2):55 -61. PubMed PMID: 17669508; eng.
83. Pacini M, Maremmani AGI, Ceccanti M, et al. Former heroin-dependent alcohol use disorder patients. Prevalence, addiction history and clinical features. Alcohol Alcohol. 2015 Mar 31; PubMed PMID: 25827777; Eng. DOI:10.1093/alcalc/agv028
84. Maremmani I. The principles and practice of methadone treatment. Pisa: Pacini Editore Medicina &amp; AU-CNS; 2009.
85. Pacini M, Maremmani AGI, Rovai L, et al. Treating heroin addicts. Blocking dosages and stimulation-stabilization of opioidergic system [Expert opinion]. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2010; 12(4):41 -48. UK.
86. Maremmani I, Pacini M, Lubrano S, et al. When ' enough ' is still not ' enough ' . Effectiveness of high-dose methadone in the treatment of heroin addiction. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2003;5(1):17 -32.
87. Brady TM, Salvucci S, Sverdlov LS, et al. Methadone dosage and retention: an examination of the 60 mg/day threshold [Comparative Study]. J Addict Dis. 2005;24(3):23 -47. PubMed PMID: 16186081; eng.
88. Maremmani I, Shinderman MS. Alcohol, benzodiazepines and other drugs use in heroin addicts treated with methadone. Polyabuse or undermedication? [Proposals]. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 1999;1(2): 7 -13. UK.
89. Lubrano S, Pacini M, Giuntoli G, et al. Is craving for heroin and alcohol related to low methadone dosages in methadone maintened patients [research report]. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2002;4(2):11 -17. UK.
90. Maremmani AG, Rovai L, Bacciardi S, et al. The long-term outcomes of heroin dependent-treatment-resistant patients with bipolar 1 comorbidity after admission to enhanced methadone maintenance [research support, non-U.S. Gov ' t]. J Affect Disord. 2013 Nov; 151(2):582 -589. PubMed PMID: 23931828; eng.
91. Maremmani I, Zolesi O, Aglietti M, et al. Methadone dose and retention during treatment of heroin addicts with axis I psychiatric comorbidity. J Addict Dis. 2000;19(2):29 -41. PubMed PMID: 10809518; eng.
92. Maremmani I, Pacini M, Canoniero S, et al. Dose determination in dual diagnosed heroin addicts during methadone treatment. Heroin Addict Relat Clin Probl. 2010;12(1):17 -24. UK.

93. Peles E, Kreek MJ, Kellogg S, et al. High methadone dose significantly reduces cocaine use in methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) patients [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov ' t]. J Addict Dis. 2006;25(1):43 -50. PubMed PMID: 16597572; eng.
94. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. World Drug Report. 2013.
95. Solowij N, Battisti R. The chronic effects of cannabis on memory in humans: a review. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2008 1 PubMed PMID: 19630708;Jan(1):81 -98.
96. Gruber AJ, Pope HG, Hudson JI, et al. Attributes of long-term heavy cannabis users: a case-control study. Psychol Med. 2003 Nov;33 (8):1415 -1422. PubMed PMID: 14672250.
97. Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. The brain ' s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Mar;1124:1 -38. PubMed PMID: 18400922.
98. Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, et al. A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):676 -682. PubMed PMID: 11209064; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC14647.
99. Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Ford JM. Default mode network activity and connectivity in psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2012;8:49 -76. PubMed PMID: 22224834.
100. Metin B, Krebs RM, Wiersema JR, et al. Dysfunctional modulation of default mode network activity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Abnorm Psychol. 2015 Feb;124(1):208 -214. PubMed PMID: 25314265.
101. van Hell HH, Jager G, Bossong MG, et al. Involvement of the endocannabinoid system in reward processing in the human brain. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012 Feb;219(4):981 -990. PubMed PMID: 21822593; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3266503.
102. Chauchard E, Hartwell KJ, McRae-Clark AL, et al. Cannabis withdrawal in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2018 Feb 22;20(1). PubMed PMID: 29489073.
103. Wiers CE, Shokri-Kojori E, Wong CT, et al. Cannabis abusers show hypofrontality and blunted brain responses to a stimulant challenge in females but not in males. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016 Sep;41(10):2596 -2605. PubMed PMID: 27156854; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4987858.
104. Howard AL, Molina BS, Swanson JM, et al. Developmental progression to early adult binge drinking and marijuana use from worsening versus stable trajectories of adolescent attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and delinquency. Addiction. 2015 May; 110(5):784 -795. PubMed PMID: 25664657; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4398637.
- Highlighting a worse outcome of ADHD trajectories in adolescents with early cannabis use.
105. Tamm L, Epstein JN, Lisdahl KM, et al. Impact of ADHD and cannabis use on executive functioning in young adults. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 Dec 1;133(2):607 -614. PubMed PMID: 23992650; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3820098.
106. Brinkman WB, Epstein JN, Auinger P, et al. Association of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and conduct disorder with early tobacco and alcohol use. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015 Feb 1;147:183 -189. PubMed PMID: 25487225; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4297712.
107. Molina BS, Pelham WE, Gnagy EM, et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder risk for heavy drinking and alcohol use disorder is age specific. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2007 Apr;31(4):643 -654. PubMed PMID: 17374044; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2680082.
108. Knop J, Penick EC, Nickel EJ, et al. Childhood ADHD and conduct disorder as independent predictors of male alcohol dependence at age 40. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2009 Mar;70(2):169 -177. PubMed PMID: 19261228; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2653603.
109. van Emmerik-van Oortmerssen K, van de Glind G, van Den Brink W, et al. Prevalence of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in
19. substance use disorder patients: a meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2012 Apr 1;122 (1 -2):11 -19. PubMed PMID: 22209385.
110. Luderer M, Sick C, Kaplan-Wickel N, et al. Prevalence estimates of ADHD in a sample of inpatients with alcohol dependence. J Atten Disord. 2018 Jan 1. PubMed PMID: 29308693. DOI: 10.1177/ 1087054717750272
111. Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Ridder EM. Conduct and attentional problems in childhood and adolescence and later substance use, abuse and dependence: results of a 25-year longitudinal study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2007 Apr;88 Suppl 1:S14 -S26. PubMed PMID: 17292565.
112. Bjork JM, Hommer DW, Grant SJ, et al. Impulsivity in abstinent alcohol-dependent patients: relation to control subjects and type 1-/type 2-like traits. Alcohol. 2004 Oct-Nov;34(2 -3):133 -150. PubMed PMID: 15902907.
113. Dom G, De Wilde B, Hulstijn W, et al. Behavioural aspects of impulsivity in alcoholics with and without a cluster-B personality disorder. Alcohol Alcohol. 2006 Jul -Aug;41(4):412 -420. PubMed PMID: 16782972.
114. Soloff PH, Lynch KG, Moss HB. Serotonin, impulsivity, and alcohol use disorders in the older adolescent: a psychobiological study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2000 Nov;24(11):1609 -1619. PubMed PMID: 11104107.
115. Weafer J, Milich R, Fillmore MT. Behavioral components of impulsivity predict alcohol consumption in adults with ADHD and healthy controls. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2011 Jan 15;113(2 -3):139 --146. PubMed PMID: 20863628; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3010339.
116. Blume AW, Schmaling KB, Marlatt GA. Memory, executive cognitive function, and readiness to change drinking behavior. Addict Behav. 2005 Feb;30(2):301 -314. PubMed PMID: 15621401.
117. Tarter RE, Kirisci L, Reynolds M, et al. Neurobehavior disinhibition in childhood predicts suicide potential and substance use disorder by young adulthood. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2004 Dec 7;76(Suppl): S45 -S52. PubMed PMID: 15555816.
118. Dupont RL, Coleman JJ, Bucher RH, et al. Characteristics and motives of college students who engage in nonmedical use of methylphenidate. Am J Addict. 2008 May -Jun;17(3):167 -171. PubMed PMID: 18463991.
119. Kooij SJ, Bejerot S, Blackwell A, et al. European consensus statement on diagnosis and treatment of adult ADHD: the European Network Adult ADHD. BMC Psychiatry. 2010 Sep 3;10:67. PubMed PMID: 20815868; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2942810.
120. Winhusen TM, Somoza EC, Brigham GS, et al. Impact of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) treatment on smoking cessation intervention in ADHD smokers: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010 Dec;71(12):1680 -1688. PubMed PMID: 20492837; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3151610.
121. Nunes EV, Covey LS, Brigham G, et al. Treating nicotine dependence by targeting attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with OROS methylphenidate: the role of baseline ADHD severity and treatment response. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;74(10):983 -990. PubMed PMID: 24229749; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3946795.
122. Gehricke JG, Hong N, Wigal TL, et al. ADHD medication reduces cotinine levels and withdrawal in smokers with ADHD. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2011 May;98(3):485 -491. PubMed PMID: 21356232; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3065552.
123. Kollins SH, English JS, Itchon-Ramos N, et al. A pilot study of lis-dexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX/SPD489) to facilitate smoking cessation in nicotine-dependent adults with ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2014 Feb;18(2):158 -168. PubMed PMID: 22508760; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3421044.
124. Ray R, Rukstalis M, Jepson C, et al. Effects of atomoxetine on subjective and neurocognitive symptoms of nicotine abstinence. J Psychopharmacol. 2009 Mar;23(2):168 -176. PubMed PMID: 18515446.