## ON HAPPINESS AND HUMAN POTENTIALS: A Review of Research on Hedonic and Eudaimonic Well-Being

## Richard M. Ryan and Edward L. Deci

Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627; e-mail: ryan@psych.rochester.edu, deci@psych.rochester.edu

Key Words subjective well-being, psychological well-being, eudaimonia, happiness, wellness n Abstract Well-beingisacomplexconstructthatconcernsoptimalexperienceand functioning. Current research on well-being has been derived from two general pe spectives: the hedonic approach, which focuses on happiness and defines well-being i terms of pleasure attainment and pain avoidance; and the eudaimonic approach, whic focuses on meaning and self-realization and defines well-being in terms of the degr to which a person is fully functioning. These two views have given rise to differ research foci and a body of knowledge that is in some areas divergent and in other complementary. New methodological developments concerning multilevel modeling and construct comparisons are also allowing researchers to formulate new questio for the field. This review considers research from both perspectives concerning nature of well-being, its antecedents, and its stability across time and culture.

## CONTENTS

| INTRODUCTION : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                               |   142 |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| TWO TRADITIONS IN THE STUDY OF WELL-BEING : : : : : : : :                                                            |   143 |
| The Hedonic View : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                               |   143 |
| The Eudaimonic View : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                                  |   145 |
| Applying the Two Viewpoints : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                                    |   148 |
| RESEARCH TOPICS IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF WELL-BEING :                                                                    |   148 |
| Personality, Individual Differences, and Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : :                                            |   149 |
| Emotions and Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                                  |   150 |
| Physical Health and Its Relations to Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                                          |   151 |
| RESEARCH ON ANTECEDENTS OF WELL-BEING : : : : : : : : : :                                                            |   152 |
| Social Class and Wealth as Predictors of Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : :                                            |   152 |
| Attachment, Relatedness, and Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :                                          |   154 |
| Goal Pursuit and Well-Being: The Ups and Downs of Trying : : : : : RESEARCH ON DIFFERENCES IN WELL-BEING ACROSS TIME |   156 |

| Lifespan Perspectives on Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :           |   157 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| Cultural Influences: Universality versus Relativism and Well-Being : : : : : : : : : : :                        |   159 |
| SUMMARY : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : |   161 |

## INTRODUCTION

The concept of well-being refers to optimal psychological functioning and expe rience. It is the focus not only of everyday interpersonal inquiries (e.g. 'How you?') but also of intense scientific scrutiny. Although the question, 'How a you?' may seem simple enough, theorists have found the issue of well-being to be complex and controversial. Indeed, from the beginnings of intellectual hist therehasbeenconsiderabledebateaboutwhatdefinesoptimalexperienceandwhat constitutes 'the good life.' Obviously, this debate has enormous theoretical practical implications. How we define well-being influences our practices of gov ernment, teaching, therapy, parenting, and preaching, as all such endeavors aim change humans for the better, and thus require some vision of what 'the better' i

Well-being research seems especially prominent in current empirical psychol ogy. In part this reflects the increasing awareness that, just as positive affect the opposite of negative affect (Cacioppo &amp; Berntson 1999), well-being is not t absence of mental illness. For much of the last century, psychology's focus on t amelioration of psychopathology overshadowed the promotion of well-being and personalgrowth.Butbeginninginthe1960swithashiftinfocustowardpreventio and continuing to the present, a few researchers have been studying growth (Dec 1975), well-being (Diener 1984), and the promotion of wellness (Cowen 1991).

Still,itisinterestingthatthereseemtohavebeentwoperiodswhentheAmeric public, as well as the community of scientific psychologists, evidenced a part ularly strong interest in issues of psychological growth and health, namely, 1960s when the human potential movement swept this country, and currently when considerable attention is being given to positive psychology (Seligman &amp; Csikszentmihalyi 2000). It may be no accident that these two periods represen times of relative affluence, when the economically advantaged have found that material security and luxury do not, in themselves, secure happiness. In this se the bursts of interest in well-being may have been prompted by a culture of surplu

For whatever reasons, the field is burgeoning. A Psychinfo search using the terms well-being and mental health brought forth 28,612 and 12,009 citations respectively, for the past 5 years. When the search was broadened to include term such as health, happiness, quality of life, and other related topics, the num swelled even further. Clearly, this important area of psychology cannot be th oughly reviewed in a short survey. Nonetheless, recent years have seen a crysta lization of themes within the field of well-being that both organize this volumino literature and provide directions for future research.

First and foremost, the field has witnessed the formation of two relative distinct, yet overlapping, perspectives and paradigms for empirical inquiry

well-being that revolve around two distinct philosophies. The first of these ca broadly labeled hedonism (Kahneman et al 1999) and reflects the view that wellbeing consists of pleasure or happiness. The second view, both as ancient and current as the hedonic view, is that well-being consists of more than just happi It lies instead in the actualization of human potentials. This view has been c eudaimonism (Waterman 1993), conveying the belief that well-being consists o fulfilling or realizing one's daimon or true nature. The two traditions-hedoni and eudaimonism-are founded on distinct views of human nature and of what constitutes a good society. Accordingly, they ask different questions concer how developmental and social processes relate to well-being, and they implici or explicitly prescribe different approaches to the enterprise of living. As w see, the findings from the two intersect, but they also diverge at critical junc

Second, methodological and theoretical advances have enabled researchers ask more sophisticated questions about well-being. The advent of multilevel mo eling [e.g. hierarchial linear modeling (HLM)] has allowed researchers to go yond the between-person or individual-difference focus that dominated the fie Instead of merely asking why person A has higher well-being than person B, researchers can now also examine the largely independent question of why person A is better off today than he or she was yesterday (Gable &amp; Reis 1999). Complementing this advance, expansion of research methods to include ideograph assessments of goals, values, and aspirations has allowed an examination of h people's experiences of well-being are shaped by attributes of their personal and their motives for pursuing them (Emmons 1986, Little 1989, Sheldon &amp; Kasser 1995). Similarly, new statistical methods for examining the cross-cultural e alence of psychological constructs (Little 1997) have allowed more exacting search on the relation of culture to well-being. This is especially crucial b formulations from evolutionary psychology have challenged the 'standard soci science model' of humans as infinitely malleable (Tooby &amp; Cosmides 1992), lending relevance to the search for the invariant as well as variant features of h functioning. Together, such advances have made well-being research a field i transition.

In this chapter, we begin by reviewing the two principal approaches to definin well-being, namely, the hedonic and eudaimonic approaches, considering the meta-theoretical, theoretical, and methodological aspects. We then proceed topical review of the literature, taking note, when appropriate, of the rela the topics to the two general perspectives.

## TWOTRADITIONS IN THE STUDY OF WELL-BEING

## The Hedonic View

Equating well-being with hedonic pleasure or happiness has a long histor Aristippus, a Greek philosopher from the fourth century B.C., taught that goal of life is to experience the maximum amount of pleasure, and that happines

is the totality of one's hedonic moments. His early philosophical hedonism ha been followed by many others. Hobbes argued that happiness lies in the successful pursuit of our human appetites, and DeSade believed that pursuit of sensati and pleasure is the ultimate goal of life. Utilitarian philosophers such as Ben argued that it is through individuals' attempting to maximize pleasure and se interest that the good society is built. Hedonism, as a view of well-being, has t been expressed in many forms and has varied from a relatively narrow focus on bodily pleasures to a broad focus on appetites and self-interests.

Psychologists who have adopted the hedonic view have tended to focus on a broad conception of hedonism that includes the preferences and pleasures of th mind as well as the body (Kubovy 1999). Indeed, the predominant view among hedonic psychologists is that well-being consists of subjective happiness and c cerns the experience of pleasure versus displeasure broadly construed to incl all judgments about the good/bad elements of life. Happiness is thus not reducib to physical hedonism, for it can be derived from attainment of goals or value outcomes in varied realms (Diener et al 1998).

In a volume that announced 'the existence of a new field of psychology,' Kahneman et al (1999) defined hedonic psychology as the study of 'what makes experiences and life pleasant and unpleasant' (p. ix). Its title, Well-being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology , clearly suggests that, within this paradigm, the terms well-being and hedonism are essentially equivalent. By defining well being in terms of pleasure versus pain, hedonic psychology poses for itself a cl and unambiguous target of research and intervention, namely maximizing human happiness. Accordingly, the volume is replete with evidence about how people calculate utilities, maximize the density of reward, and optimize inputs associ with pleasure versus displeasure.

Althoughtherearemanywaystoevaluatethepleasure/paincontinuuminhuman experience, most research within the new hedonic psychology has used assessment of subjective well-being (SWB) (Diener &amp; Lucas 1999). SWB consists of three components: life satisfaction, the presence of positive mood, and the absence negative mood, together often summarized as happiness.

Just as there have been philosophical arguments about equating hedonic plea sure with well-being, there has been considerable debate about the degree to whi measures of SWB adequately define psychological wellness (e.g. Ryff &amp; Singer 1998).Accordingly,therearetwoimportantissuesconcerningthehedonicpositi in research on well-being. One concerns the validity of SWB and related measures as operational definitions of ( a ) hedonism and/or ( b ) well-being. The other concerns the types of social activities, goals, and attainments theorized to pro well-being, however it is assessed. As such, there are three defensible posit that could result from a consideration of these questions. First, one could ac both the hedonic view and SWB as its indicator. Second, one could accept the use of SWB as an operational definition of well-being but endorse a eudaimonic view of what fosters SWB. And third, one could both reject the measure of SWB as an indicator of well-being and argue against hedonic principles as the vehicle

produce well-being. Regardless of what is said about this debate, SWB has reigne as the primary index of well-being during the past decade and a half, and much o the research reviewed herein employs SWB as a major outcome variable.

Although there are various theoretical perspectives associated with hedo psychology, some of its most prominent proponents have eschewed theory, arguing for a bottom-up empirical approach. Specifically, some have argued tha we need to know more 'elementary facts before a large theory is created' (Diene et al 1998, p. 35). Nevertheless, one can characterize the dominant work in hedo psychology in theoretical terms, even if they remain implicit. Overall, the the whether implicit or explicit, tend to fit within what Tooby &amp; Cosmides (1992) ref to as the standard social science model, which is built on the assumption of an en mous amount of malleability to human nature. With this meta-theoretical start point, much of the work fits with the expectancy-value approach (e.g. Oishi et 1999),whichinitssimplestformsuggeststhatwell-beingisafunctionofexpec to attain (and ultimately attaining) the outcomes one values, whatever those m be. The focus of hedonic psychology on pleasure versus pain also readily links with behavioral theories of reward and punishment (e.g. Shizgal 1999) and the ries focused on cognitive expectations about such outcomes (e.g. Peterson 199 Furthermore, the claim of hedonic psychologists and expectancy-value theori that the goals through which well-being is enhanced can be highly idiosyncrat and culturally specific would also seem to fit well within a relativistic, postmo view. Thus, although explicit theory is often not endorsed by hedonic research implicit theoretical themes are identifiable.

## The Eudaimonic View

Despite the currency of the hedonic view, many philosophers, religious maste and visionaries, from both the East and West, have denigrated happiness per as a principal criterion of well-being. Aristotle, for example, considered h happiness to be a vulgar ideal, making humans slavish followers of desires. posited, instead, that true happiness is found in the expression of virtue-th in doing what is worth doing. Fromm (1981), drawing on this Aristotelian view argued that optimal well-being (vivere bene) requires distinguishing between those needs (desires) that are only subjectively felt and whose satisfaction leads to momentary pleasure, and those needs that are rooted human nature and whose realization is conducive to human growth and produces eudaimonia, i.e. 'well-being.' In other words... the distinctio between purely subjectively felt needs and objectively valid needs-part o

the former being harmful to human growth and the latter being in accordance with the requirements of human nature (p. xxvi).

The term eudaimonia is valuable because it refers to well-being as disti from happiness per se. Eudaimonic theories maintain that not all desires-not outcomes that a person might value-would yield well-being when achieved. Even

though they are pleasure producing, some outcomes are not good for people and would not promote wellness. Thus, from the eudaimonic perspective, subjective happiness cannot be equated with well-being.

Waterman (1993) stated that, whereas happiness is hedonically defined, the eu daimonic conception of well-being calls upon people to live in accordance wit their daimon, or true self. He suggested that eudaimonia occurs when people's li activities are most congruent or meshing with deeply held values and are holist cally or fully engaged. Under such circumstances people would feel intensely ali and authentic, existing as who they really are-a state Waterman labeled persona expressiveness (PE). Empirically, Waterman showed that measures of hedonic enjoyment and PE were strongly correlated, but were nonetheless indicative o distinct types of experience. For example, whereas both PE and hedonic measures were associated with drive fulfillments, PE was more strongly related to activit that afforded personal growth and development. Furthermore, PE was more associated with being challenged and exerting effort, whereas hedonic enjoyment wa more related to being relaxed, away from problems, and happy.

Ryff &amp; Singer (1998, 2000) have explored the question of well-being in the context of developing a lifespan theory of human flourishing. Also drawing from Aristotle, they describe well-being not simply as the attaining of pleasure, b 'the striving for perfection that represents the realization of one's true pot (Ryff 1995, p. 100). Ryff &amp; Keyes (1995) thus spoke of psychological well-being (PWB) as distinct from SWB and presented a multidimensional approach to the measurement of PWB that taps six distinct aspects of human actualization: auton omy, personal growth, self-acceptance, life purpose, mastery, and positive re edness. These six constructs define PWB both theoretically and operationally an they specify what promotes emotional and physical health (Ryff &amp; Singer 1998). They have presented evidence, for example, that eudaimonic living, as represent by PWB, can influence specific physiological systems relating to immunological functioning and health promotion.

In an engaging and instructive debate, Ryff &amp; Singer (1998) challenged SWB models of well-being as being of limited scope where positive functioning i concerned, and specifically that SWB is often a fallible indicator of healthy liv In turn, Diener et al (1998) retorted that Ryff &amp; Singer's eudaimonic criteria experts define well-being, whereas SWB research allows people to tell researcher what makes their life good. What is most clear from this clash of paradigms is tha these differing definitions of wellness have led to quite different types of inq concerning the causes, consequences, and dynamics of well-being.

Self-determination theory (SDT) (Ryan &amp; Deci 2000) is another perspective that has both embraced the concept of eudaimonia, or self-realization, as a cen definitional aspect of well-being and attempted to specify both what it means to a tualizetheselfandhowthatcanbeaccomplished.Specifically,SDTpositsthreeb sic psychological needs-autonomy, competence, and relatedness-and theorizes that fulfillment of these needs is essential for psychological growth (e.g. int motivation), integrity (e.g. internalization and assimilation of cultural pr

and well-being (e.g. life satisfaction and psychological health), as well as th riences of vitality (Ryan &amp; Frederick 1997) and self-congruence (Sheldon &amp; Elli 1999). Need fulfillment is thus viewed as a natural aim of human life that delinea manyofthemeaningsandpurposesunderlyinghumanactions(Deci&amp;Ryan2000).

Specification of basic needs defines not only the minimum requirements of psychologicalhealthbutalsodelineatesprescriptivelythenutrimentsthatth environmentmustsupplyforpeopletothriveandgrowpsychologically.Thus,SDT describes the conditions that facilitate versus undermine well-being within v developmental periods and specific social contexts such as schools, workplace and friendships. SDT does not, however, suggest that the basic needs are equal valued in all families, social groups, or cultures, but it does maintain that th of these needs will result in negative psychological consequences in all so or cultural contexts. As such, contextual and cultural, as well as developme factors continually influence the modes of expression, the means of satisfact and the ambient supports for these needs, and it is because of their effects on satisfaction that they, in turn, influence growth, integrity, and well-being between-person and within-person levels of analysis.

SDThasbothimportantsimilaritiesanddifferenceswithRyff&amp;Singer's(199 eudaimonic approach. We wholly concur that well-being consists in what Rogers (1963)referredtoasbeingfullyfunctioning,ratherthanassimplyattainingd We also are largely in agreement concerning the content of being eudaimonice.g. being autonomous, competent, and related. However, our approach theoriz that these contents are the principal factors that foster well-being, wherea and Singer's approach uses them to define well-being.

SDT posits that satisfaction of the basic psychological needs typically fo SWB as well as eudaimonic well-being. This results from our belief that bein satisfied with one's life and feeling both relatively more positive affect an negative affect (the typical measures of SWB) do frequently point to psychologi wellness, for, as Rogers (1963) suggested, emotional states are indicative of o ismic valuation processes. That is, the assessment of positive and negative a is useful insofar as emotions are, in part, appraisals of the relevance and vale eventsandconditionsoflifewithrespecttotheself.Thus,inSDTresearch,we typically used SWB as one of several indicators of well-being. However, we have at the same time maintained that there are different types of positive experi and that some conditions that foster SWB do not promote eudaimonic well-being. For example, research by Nix et al (1999) showed that succeeding at an activi while feeling pressured to do so resulted in happiness (a positive affect cl linked to SWB), but it did not result in vitality (a positive affect more cl aligned with eudaimonic well-being). On the other hand, as predicted by SDT succeeding at an activity while feeling autonomous resulted in both happiness vitality. Thus, because conditions that promote SWB may not necessarily yie eudaimonic well-being, SDT research has typically supplemented SWB measures with assessments of self-actualization, vitality, and mental health in an ef assess well-being conceived of as healthy, congruent, and vital functioning.

## Applying the Two Viewpoints

The debate between hedonic and eudaimonic theorists is, as we have said, both ancient and contemporary and has often been quite heated. It will not be resolve herein. Rather, we have highlighted these two positions because of their theoret and practical importance and because these approaches have generated distinc but interfacing, research literatures in topical areas that we review.

Evidence from a number of investigators has indicated that well-being is prob ably best conceived as a multidimensional phenomenon that includes aspects of both the hedonic and eudaimonic conceptions of well-being. For example, Compton et al (1996) investigated the relation among 18 indicators of well-being a mental health, identifying two factors, one that seemed to reflect SWB and the other, personal growth. These two factors were themselves moderately correlate The results of this study thus suggested that the hedonic and eudaimonic foci a both overlapping and distinct and that an understanding of well-being may be enhanced by measuring it in differentiated ways. King &amp; Napa (1998) asked lay people to rate features of the good life and found that both happiness and mean ing were implicated. McGregor &amp; Little (1998) analyzed a diverse set of mental health indicators and also found two factors, one reflecting happiness and t other, meaningfulness. These researchers showed that, when pursuing persona goals, doing well and feeling happy may be disconnected from finding meaning and acting with integrity. Thus, in spite of the significant overlap, the interesting results may be those that highlight the factors leading to diverg rather than just convergence in the hedonic and eudaimonic indicators of wel being.

## RESEARCH TOPICS IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF WELL-BEING

In what follows we briefly survey a number of research topics concerning wellbeing, focusing especially on those with a lively presence in contemporary r search. The topics are quite diverse. Some grapple with the psychological meanin of well-being. For example, to what extent is well-being an individual differen What is the role of emotions in well-being? and To what extent is physical healt intertwined with well-being? Other topics search for antecedents of well-bei at the between-person and within-person levels. Such factors as wealth, sat fying relationships, and goal attainment have been addressed. Still other to concern whether well-being is different across time or place, for example, in d ferent developmental periods and in different cultures. As we shall see, in ma of these topical areas researchers with hedonic versus eudaimonic interests h tended to ask different kinds of questions and approach the answers by differe routes.

## Personality, Individual Differences, and Well-Being

Two closely related and frequently asked question are, What type of people ar likely to be well or happy? and Are there people who can be characterized as bein happy or well? In other words, are there personality factors that consistently to well-being, and can well-being itself be thought of as a personality variab

These questions have been actively researched with regard to SWB. DeNeve (1999) suggested that SWB is determined to a substantial degree by genetic facto and argued that SWB is relatively stable across the life span. In fact, DeNeve Cooper (1998) did a meta-analysis involving 197 samples with more than 40,000 adults, in which SWB was a criterion variable related to various personality tr Many personality traits were significantly associated with SWB, suggesting a co respondencebetweenchronicpersonalitystylesandindividualdifferencesinSW For instance, of the 'big five' traits (Costa &amp; McCrae 1992), DeNeve &amp; Cooper reported that extraversion and agreeableness were consistently positively assoc with SWB, whereas neuroticism was consistently negatively associated with it.

Diener &amp; Lucas (1999) suggested that these big five findings should come as no surprise because extraversion is characterized by positive affect and neurot is virtually defined by negative affect. For instance, they cited evidence that trolling for measurement error, the correlation between extraversion and pos mood was 0.80, and that neuroticism and trait negative affect were indistingu able. That is, the negative relation between SWB and neuroticism, which concern the tendency to experience negative affect, is somewhat tautological. In line Seidlitz (1993), Diener &amp; Lucas further suggest that conscientiousness, agreea ness, and openness to experience are less strongly and consistently linked to S because these traits have their sources in 'rewards in the environment' (p. 320 other words, as individual differences, these three are more a function of env mental influences, whereas extraversion and neuroticism may be more a function of genetic factors.

Because of the trait-like features of SWB, some studies have focused on con trasts between chronically happy and unhappy people. Lyubomirsky &amp; Tucker (1998), for example, demonstrated that characteristically happy people ten construe the same life events and encounters more favorably than unhappy people Further, Lyubomirsky &amp; Ross (1999) showed that individuals high, relative to lo in SWB tended to cast events and situations in a more positive light, to be l responsive to negative feedback, and to more strongly denigrate opportunities are not available to them. Thus, people high in SWB may have attributional styl that are more self-enhancing and, perhaps, more enabling, which in turn cou contribute to the relative stability of their happiness.

Ryff and colleagues have examined the relation of the big five traits to th multiple dimensions of psychological well-being. Schmutte &amp; Ryff (1997) found that extraversion, conscientiousness, and low neuroticism were linked with eudaimonic dimensions of self-acceptance, mastery, and life purpose; openness

experience was linked to personal growth; agreeableness and extraversion wer linked to positive relationships; and low neuroticism was linked to autonomy.

Sheldonetal(1997)examinedrelationsbetweenthebigfiveandwell-being,but these researchers explored whether the degree of variability in a person's ratin each trait across life roles (e.g. student, child, friend, etc), rather than th characteristic level on each trait, would relate to well-being, regardless specific trait being considered. In line with work by Roberts &amp; Donahue (1994), Sheldon et al showed that greater variability in individuals' endorsements of t across roles was associated with lower general well-being. Further, as predicte SDT,Sheldonetalpostulatedandfoundthatpeopleweremostlikelytodepartfrom their general trait characteristics in life roles in which they were least aut that is, where they felt least able to express their true self. In a similar ve Paradise &amp; MH Kernis (unpublished manuscript) found that greater variability i self-esteem scores over time, even among people whose average self-esteem was high, was associated with poorer well-being assessed with Ryff's (1989a) measure

## Emotions and Well-Being

The relation of emotions to well-being, like that of traits to well-being, to some extent with the meaning of well-being itself. As such, the hedonic an eudaimonic perspectives have quite different views and have engaged in divers types of research.

ResearchonemotionsandSWBhasfoundthat:( a )peopleongoinglyexperience affect; ( b ) affect is valenced and easily judged as positive or negative; and ( c ) most people report having positive affect most of the time (Diener &amp; Lucas 2000). Thus because having more positive emotion and less negative emotion is SWB, the studies imply that people, in general, have fairly high SWB. Some researchers have focused on how to maintain positive affect and ameliorate negative affect, and o ers have focused on daily fluctuations in affect and on how ongoing experiences of affect relate to global SWB. Considerable research has addressed how people estimate mood over time, including the weight they give to various events (Kah neman 1999), as well as how response styles and the order of questions can affect global estimates (Schwarz &amp; Strack 1991). For example, Diener et al (1991) found global judgments of subjective well-being to be based more in the frequency tha intensity of positive experiences. In fact, it seems that intense positive em are often attended by increased unpleasant affect (Larsen &amp; Diener 1987).

There is some indication that SWB is affected by positive and negative lif events (Headey &amp; Wearing 1989), but Suh et al (1996) found that the impact of events on SWB was brief. Further, because SWB is to some extent traitlike and people high, relative to low, in SWB are likely to construe the same event more positively, it is still unclear how much effect actual life events have on well-b

The eudaimonic position, in contrast to the hedonic view, suggests that the i portant issue concerning emotions is not feeling positive per se (see Parrott 19 but rather is the extent to which a person is fully functioning (Rogers 1963). Th under some conditions (e.g. the death of a loved one) a person would be considered

to be more fully functioning, and, ultimately, to have greater well-being, if she experienced rather than avoided the negative feeling of sadness. From a eud monic view, such issues as the repression, disclosure, compartmentalization, overcontrol versus undercontrol of emotions are highly pertinent to what defin wellness. For instance, work reviewed by King &amp; Pennebaker (1998) suggests that suppressingorwithholdingemotionshasclearcostsforpsychologicalandphysi health, and DeNeve &amp; Cooper (1998) found that people high in repressive tendencies tend to have lower SWB. Conversely, there seem to be well-being benefits to emotional disclosure (Butzel &amp; Ryan 1997). Such findings fit the claims of eudaimonictheoriststhatemotionalaccessandcongruenceareimportantforwell-bei

Another line of eudaimonic research on emotions suggests that, because emo tional positivity is not part of the definition of well-being, affect can be s as an outcome of eudaimonic processes. Thus, although more positive affect i not considered an end in itself, it would be expected, under many circumstance to be a byproduct of eudaimonic living. Ryff &amp; Singer (1998), for example, re ported moderate correlations between their eudaimonic assessment of well-bei and SWB. They emphasize some dimensions over others in these relations-in particular, positive relations were found to be particularly strongly related itive emotional experiences. More generally, these researchers viewed emoti as a catalyst to health states, and they focused on the capacity of deep emoti experience to mobilize antistress and disease resistant functions.

A final strand of research on emotions using a eudaimonic perspective has examined psychological conditions that promote positive emotions, including h piness and vitality. This work, which has been done at both the between-person and within-person levels, has considered the relation of basic need satisfact these emotional indices of well-being. In one study, Sheldon et al (1996) examin daily fluctuations in satisfaction of autonomy and competence over 2 weeks. Usin HLM, they found that at the between-persons level feelings of autonomy and competence predicted happiness and vitality, but also that at the within-person fluctuations in experiences of fulfillment of the two needs significantly predic fluctuations in the affects. Subsequently, Reis et al (2000) showed that wit person fluctuations in all three of SDT's basic needs predicted the positive aff Specifically, daily experiences of autonomy, competence, and relatedness ea contributed unique variance to the prediction of happiness and vitality.

## Physical Health and Its Relations to Well-Being

That there ought to be an association between health status and well-being see intuitively clear. Sickness is often associated with displeasure or pain, so t enceofillnessmightdirectlyincreasenegativeaffect.Further,illnessoften functional limitations, which can detract from opportunities for positive aff life satisfaction.

Empiricalresultshavesupportedthesespeculations.Specifically,anearlym analysis by Okun et al (1984) relating self-reported physical health to SWB fou an average correlation of 0.32. However, the relation seems to be more comple

Sept 2025 01:07:38

than one might expect. Some people with objectively poor health have high SWB, whereas, conversely, some people with low well-being have no signs of somatic illness. Befitting these observations, Okun et al found that when health was rat by others (e.g. doctors) the correlation dropped noticeably to 0.16. This sugg that the meaning and construal of health states may be a major factor in SWB. SWB is, after all, subjective, so one would expect it to be affected by personal and by interpretive and reporting styles.

Ryan &amp; Frederick (1997) assessed subjective vitality, a positive and phe nomenologically accessible state of having energy available to the self, and u it as an indicator of eudaimonic well-being. They found that subjective vitalit only correlated with psychological factors such as personal autonomy and rela edness, but that it also covaried with physical symptoms. That is, more physic symptomsinadaypredicteddecreasedenergyandalivenessforthatday,asdidpoo healthhabitssuchassmokingandfattydiets.Theyarguedthatvitalityisaphen enally salient variable that is affected by both somatic and psychological fact

Ryff&amp;Singer(2000)usedbothempiricalandcasestudyevidencetounderscore how various dimensions of eudaimonic living yield salubrious effects on healt more generally, including lower allostatic load and better autoimmune functioni Their work indicated that the PWB dimension of positive relationships with other was particularly critical to the promotion of health-related processes.

## RESEARCH ON ANTECEDENTS OF WELL-BEING

Considerable research has examined antecedent conditions likely to facilitate w being. We review some of that work, organized in terms of wealth, relationships and goal pursuits. Because the literature is voluminous, the review is necessa and perhaps arbitrarily, selective.

## Social Class and Wealth as Predictors of Well-Being

A question of widespread interest among researchers and laypeople alike concern therelationofwealthtohappinessandwell-being.Relationsofbothattainedwea and wealth-related goals and aspirations have been addressed from both hedoni and eudaimonic perspectives.

Does money make people happy? Long traditions in folklore and lay wisdom suggest answers in both directions. From the view of hedonic psychology, which has no a priori basis for speculating on this matter, the question is empirical thus far the answer has been mixed.

In a recent review, E Diene r &amp; R Biswas-Diener (unpublished) summarized research on wealth and SWB as follows: ( a ) people in richer nations are happier than people in poorer nations; ( b ) increases in national wealth within developed nations have not, over recent decades, been associated with increases in SWB ( c ) within-nation differences in wealth show only small positive correlations w

happiness; ( d ) increases in personal wealth do not typically result in increased piness; and ( e ) people who strongly desire wealth and money are more unhappy than those who do not. Although they reviewed different theoretical accounts these findings, they concluded that there remain too many unknowns to supply an integrated model. However, they stated that avoiding poverty, living in a rich c try, and focusing on goals other than material wealth are associated with attai happiness.

Diener &amp; Diener (1995) examined the strength of the relations between sat isfaction with specific domains (family, friends, finances) and life satisfact college students from 31 nations. They found that, among the differential relat financial status was more correlated with life satisfaction in poorer nations wealthier nations.

Why might wealth be more important for increasing life satisfaction among people in poorer nations? Although there is not yet a clear answer, one key iss concerns the functional freedoms that accompany national wealth for all cultu members. A poor infrastructure within a nation constrains opportunities for ble relationships, personal expressiveness, and productivity. Thus, not onl national poverty interfere with satisfaction of physical needs, such as foo shelter, but it can also block access to exercising competencies, pursuing inte and maintaining relationships, which would provide psychological need satisf tion. Thus, within poorer nations, the value of money for satisfying needs may more critical than it is within a nation where most citizens have access to s basic resources for pursuing their goals.

Although the hedonic viewpoint would have little reason to view money as a problematic goal, a long tradition of eudaimonic and organismic theorists h questioned wealth and materialism as life goals. Drawing from the eudaimoni view and from SDT, Kasser &amp; Ryan (1993, 1996) related money and materialism to well-being. They predicted that people who place a strong value on wealth relat to goals such as close relationships, personal growth, and community generativ which are more closely related to basic psychological need fulfillment, shou show lower well-being. From a eudaimonic view, placing too much priority on material goods (as well as goals such as fame and image), which in themselves do not satisfy basic psychological needs, can at best only partially satisfy the and at worst can distract from foci that would yield need fulfillment. Furth because achieving money, fame, and image is often contingent on engaging in nonautonomous activities, emphasizing such goals may detract from a sense o authenticity and result in lower well-being. Beyond the relations of relative to well-being, this view further suggests that once a person is beyond poverty l (and thus has sustenance and security) the attainment of more wealth should ad little to well-being, whereas attaining fulfillment of goals more deeply conne with the basic psychological needs should directly enhance well-being.

Several studies have supported this overall model, showing that the more peop focusonfinancialandmaterialisticgoals,thelowertheirwell-being.Thisresu been confirmed both in developed countries such as the United States and Germany

(Kasser &amp; Ryan 1996, Schmuck et al 2000) and in less economically developed nations such as Russia and India (e.g. Ryan et al 1999). Furthermore, both cros sectional (Ryan et al 1999) and longitudinal (Sheldon &amp; Kasser 1998) studies sug gest that, whereas progress toward intrinsic goals enhances well-being, progr toward extrinsic goals such as money either does not enhance well-being or does so to a lesser extent. Finally, as Carver &amp; Baird (1998) found, the rel tion between money and well-being is in part a function of the loss of autonomy associated with this life goal.

Ryff et al (1999) examined the impact of impoverishment on eudaimonic outcomes. Using the PWB measure, they found that socio-economic status was linked to the dimensions of self-acceptance, purpose, mastery, and growth. Many of th negative effects of lower socio-economic status on these dimensions appeared t result from social comparison processes, in which poorer individuals compare themselves unfavorably with others and felt unable to gain resources that cou adjust perceived inequalities.

In sum, work in both the hedonic and eudaimonic traditions converges on the point that money does not appear to be a reliable route to either happiness or we being. The relation of wealth to well-being is at best a low positive one, altho it is clear that material supports can enhance access to resources that are impor for happiness and self-realization. There appear to be many risks to poverty but f benefits to wealth when it comes to well-being. Furthermore, studies show speci fiable eudaimonic hazards for those who overly value wealth and material goods.

## Attachment, Relatedness, and Well-Being

There has been increasing appreciation within psychology of the fundamental importance of warm, trusting, and supportive interpersonal relationships for w being. So important is relatedness that some theorists have defined relatedness a basic human need that is essential for well-being (Baumeister &amp; Leary 1995, Deci &amp; Ryan 1991), and others have suggested that having stable, satisfying rel tionships is a general resilience factor across the lifespan (Mikulincer &amp; Fl 1998). Insofar as there is validity to this view, one would expect a strong, unive association between the quality of relationships and well-being outcomes.

Evidence supporting the link of relatedness to SWB is manifold. Studies suggest that, of all factors that influence happiness, relatedness is at or very ne top of the list (Argyle 1987, Myers 1999). Furthermore, as DeNeve (1999) noted, affiliation and relationship-enhancing traits are among the most strongly rel with SWB. Furthermore, loneliness is consistently negatively related to posi affect and life satisfaction (Lee &amp; Ishii-Kuntz 1987). Still, the topic of rel ships is complex, and even close relationships are multifaceted, so specific is warranted concerning what aspects of relationships engender wellness. Tw concepts-attachment and intimacy-are especially relevant (Reis &amp; Patrick 1996

The construct of attachment derives from the work of Bowlby (1969), who argued that early relationships with caregivers can be characterized in term differing degrees of felt security and support. Attachment studies were init

done with relationships during infancy (Ainsworth et al 1978) and more recent during adolescence and adulthood (Hazan &amp; Shaver 1987). The main idea is that individuals have a predominant working model that varies in the degree to whic it represents secure versus insecure attachment to others. Many studies have c firmed a relation between attachment security and well-being broadly construe and some theorists have argued that secure attachments themselves are an indica of well-being (e.g. Simpson 1990).

Althoughsecurityofattachmenthastypicallybeenviewedasastableindivid difference, recent work suggests that there is considerable within-person var in attachment security with different relational partners. Baldwin et al ( showed descriptively that most people exhibit different attachment styles different figures in their lives. La Guardia et al (2000) found that this wi person variability in security of attachment was predicted by the degree to wh an individual experiences need satisfaction with particular partners; thos whom one experiences security are those who facilitate feelings of autonom competence,andrelatedness.Theresearchersfurthershowedthat,toaconsider degree, the positive effects of attachment security on well-being were media by need satisfaction. Thus, it appears that secure attachments foster wellin large part because they represent relationships within which a person sati needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness.

Research on intimacy also highlights the importance of relatedness for we being and underscores that it is the quality of relatedness which engenders w being. For example, Nezlek (2000) reviewed a number of studies showing that, whereas quantity of interactions does not predict well-being, quality of re ness does. Carstensen's (1998) Social Selectivity Theory, as well as work in S

(e.g. V. Kasser &amp; Ryan 1999) points to the same conclusion.

This work on the quality of relationships examining between-person relatio has found that individuals who in general have more intimate or higher-quali relationships tend to demonstrate greater well-being. Work by Reis et al (20 showed further that within-person, day-to-day variations in feelings of relat over a two-week period predicted daily indicators of well-being, including pos affect and vitality. Data were also gathered concerning the type of interaction fostered relatedness and, in turn, well-being. In support of both intimacy t and SDT, it was found that people experienced greater relatedness when they fe understood, engaged in meaningful dialog, or had fun with others.

Recall that, in the work of Ryff and colleagues, positive relations with oth a dimension of well-being. Thus, whereas much of the work reviewed herein treat relationships as a source of well-being, Ryff &amp; Singer (2000) treat it as a defi element of PWB, viewing positive relations with others as an essential element human flourishing. In relating this variable to others, Ryff et al (2001) revi evidence that positive relations predicted physiological functioning and h outcomes, including the secretion of oxytocin, which is associated with posi mood and stress relief. Their view is also supported by Uchino et al (1999), wh showed that social support influences mortality via changes in cardiovascul endocrine, and autoimmune systems.

## Goal Pursuit and Well-Being: The Ups and Downs of Trying

Another active area of research has been the relations of goals and goal progress well-being. It fits with many theories in psychology that feelings of competence efficacy with regard to life goals should be associated with greater positive af and well-being. More controversial is the issue of whether goal pursuits must autonomous or integrated to the self in order to yield greater wellness. Where hedonic theory has typically adhered to an expectancy value model where autonomy has had no role, issues related to the autonomy, authenticity, and congruenc of goal pursuits have been a concern of eudaimonic researchers.

PerceivedCompetenceandSelf-Efficacy Alargebodyofresearchpointsclearly to the fact that feeling competent and confident with respect to valued goals is sociated with enhanced well-being (Carver &amp; Scheier 1999, McGregor &amp; Little 1998). Furthermore, it is clear that goal progress, on average, predicts enha well-being, particularly goals that are rated as important (e.g. Brunstein 1 However, these general findings can be unpacked into various processes that contribute to the relation.

One issue concerns the level of challenge posed by one's goals. When life goals are nonoptimally challenging-either too easy or too difficult-positive affect lower (Csikszentmihalyi &amp; Csikszentmihalyi 1988). Low expectations of success have also been associated with high negative affect (Emmons 1986), and as noted, Waterman (1993) found an association between eudaimonic outcomes (PE) and growth-related, effortful challenge.

Another concern is whether one's goal activities are characterized by approa oravoidancemotivationalsystems.Elliot&amp;Sheldon(1997),forexample,classifi goals as approach or avoidance and then examined the effects of goal progress ove a short-term period. Pursuit of avoidance goals was associated with both poor goal progress and with lower well-being. Elliot et al (1997) similarly showed t people whose personal goals contained a higher proportion of avoidance had lower SWB. They also demonstrated the association between neuroticism and avoidance goals, but showed that the impact of avoidance regulation was evident even when controlling for neuroticism. Carver &amp; Scheier (1999) also presented research li ing approach goals (positively) and avoidance goals (negatively) to well-be outcomes.

Otherworkpointstotheimportanceofgoalsandmotivesbeingalignedforwellbeing effects to accrue. For example, Brunstein et al (1998) found that motive-go congruence accounted for the effects of goal progress on SWB. Furthermore, they showedthatcommitmenttomotive-incongruentgoalscanevenresultinwell-being declines. Such evidence suggests that how goals are anchored within the self bea on their influence on well-being.

Autonomy and Integration of Goals Another actively researched issue concerns how autonomous one is in pursuing goals. SDT in particular has taken a strong

stand on this by proposing that only self-endorsed goals will enhance well-bei so pursuit of heteronomous goals, even when done efficaciously, will not. Th relative autonomy of personal goals has, accordingly, been shown repeatedly to predictive of well-being outcomes controlling for goal efficacy at both betwe person and within-person levels of analysis (Ryan &amp; Deci 2000). Interesting this pattern of findings has been supported in cross-cultural research, sugge that the relative autonomy of one's pursuits matters whether one is collectiv or individualistic, male or female (e.g. V Chirkov &amp; RM Ryan 2001; Hayamizu 1997, Vallerand 1997).

Sheldon &amp; Elliot (1999) developed a self-concordance model of how autonomy relates to well-being. Self-concordant goals are those that fulfill basic nee are aligned with one's true self. These goals are well-internalized and ther autonomous, and they emanate from intrinsic or identified motivations. Goals th are not self-concordant encompass external or introjected motivation, and ar ther unrelated or indirectly related to need fulfillment. Sheldon &amp; Elliot f that, although goal attainment in itself was associated with greater well-bein effect was significantly weaker when the attained goals were not self-concorda People who attained more self-concordant goals had more need-satisfying exper ences, and this greater need satisfaction was predictive of greater SWB. Simil Sheldon &amp; Kasser (1998) studied progress toward goals in a longitudinal desig finding that goal progress was associated with enhanced SWB and lower symptoms of depression. However, the impact of goal progress was again moderated by goal concordance. Goals that were poorly integrated to the self, whose focus w not related to basic psychological needs, conveyed less SWB benefits, even when achieved.

Finally, the previously mentioned Nix et al (1999) study showed that wherea successful goal pursuits led to happiness, it was only when the pursuits w autonomous that success yielded vitality. McGregor &amp; Little (1998) suggest that the meaningfulness of goals is a separate issue from that of goal efficacy, in a study of personal projects they found that, whereas perceived efficacy w linked to happiness, the relative integrity of goals was linked to meaningfuln

From the perspective of SDT, psychological well-being results in large pa from satisfaction of the basic psychological needs for autonomy, competenc and relatedness, so it makes sense that autonomy as well as efficacy would be important for eudaimonic well-being, just as relatedness or attachment contri considerably to well-being (Reis et al 2000).

## RESEARCH ON DIFFERENCES IN WELL-BEING ACROSS TIME AND PLACE

## Lifespan Perspectives on Well-Being

The past decade has witnessed tremendous advances in lifespan psychology, and some of the most intriguing findings concern well-being. Indeed, seemingl

anomalous findings in lifespan studies have generated many new understandings of the dynamics of well-being. Perhaps the most salient of these is the s called paradox of aging. It has been found that in old age not only does subjecti well-being not decline, but it typically increases, despite evidence that wit comes many challenges and losses (Carstensen 1998, Mroczek &amp; Kolarz 1998). Thus, lifespan studies offer a window into the dynamics of SWB and eudaimonic well-being, as resources, capacities, and support systems change systematica with age.

Because Ryff defines well-being in a multidimensional way, her work especially lends itself to the descriptive study of lifespan changes in well-being and coworkers have investigated, first, whether people's conceptions of well-bei change with age and, second, whether different components of well-being vary with age. The answer to both questions is yes. Regarding people's conceptions o well-being, Ryff (1989b) found that, although diverse age groups endorse good relationships and the pursuit of enjoyable activities as important for well-b there were age differences on other dimensions, with younger adults focused more on self-knowledge, competence, and self-acceptance, and older adults focuse more on positive coping with change. These findings accord well with those of Carstensen (1998), who suggested that the functions of relationships chan with age. Younger adults are more interested in novelty, knowledge, and experience expansion, and older adults are more interested in depth and poignanc With regard to variation in the components of well-being, Ryff (1991) compared groups of young, middle-aged, and older adults, identifying age tren on a number of dimensions. Older adults experienced less personal growth than younger groups; middle-aged adults experienced more autonomy than younger or older groups; and middle and older groups experienced more mastery than the younger group. There were no age trends for positive relations with others or f self-acceptance.

Ryan &amp; La Guardia (2000) discussed the relations of need fulfillment to motivation and well-being across the lifespan. They reviewed evidence for the critical of relatedness, competence, and autonomy in fostering well-being at all ages, s gesting that basic psychological needs influence well-being across life. Howev the manner in which these needs are expressed and satisfied varies with age and with the life tasks, challenges, and affordances that change with age. They focu particularly on the role of age-related social contexts such as school and w in affecting well-being and on the adequacy of cultural scaffolds in support eudaimonia.

Work on SWB and aging also reveals that earlier theories of declines in wellbeing were not accurate. Diener &amp; Lucas (2000) pointed out that pleasant affec tends to decline with age, but life satisfaction and negative affect do not ch with age. They said that many measures of positive affect focus on aroused, excite states and this focus may account for the observed decline, whereas measures more focused on less activated states might not indicate a decline.

## Cultural Influences: Universality versus Relativism and Well-Being

At the outset of this review we commented that the definition of well-being i controversial and unresolved. The meaning of well-being and the factors th facilitate it are particularly at issue in cross-cultural studies in which a quest is the search for systematic variants versus invariants in well-being dyn across widely discrepant social arrangements. Christopher (1999) instruct argued that definitions of well-being are inherently culturally rooted and fu that there can be no such thing as a value-free assessment of well-being. Accord to Christopher, all understandings of well-being are essentially moral vis based on individuals' judgments about what it means to be well.

Because the very definition of well-being raises cultural questions about meaning and equivalence of constructs, quantitatively oriented researchers often been bereft of answers to criticisms of cultural bias. Although such conc should continue, at least some strategies have emerged that allow statistical a ments of the cultural equivalence of psychological constructs. Illustrative means and covariance structure analyses, which assess the degree to which the ps chometricpropertiesofaconstructcanbecomparablymodeledacrossdiversepo ulations (Little 1997). Cross-cultural researchers in this area will need to such methods as a requisite for interpretive confidence in their findings. Howev because of the newness of these techniques, few studies have employed them.

Diener and colleagues have reported a number of cross-cultural factors asso ated with SWB. Their analyses have included both mean level differences between nations on SWB and differential correlates of well-being across nations. For ex ple, Diener &amp; Diener (1995) found that across nations, self-esteem was associa with well-being, but that relation was stronger in countries characterized by vidualism. The strength of association of SWB to satisfaction with wealth, frie and family also varied by nation.

Suh et al (1998) studied the relations of emotions and norms (social approva to life satisfaction in 61 nations. They found that whereas emotions were a stro predictor of life satisfaction in nations classified as individualist, norms a tions were equally predictive within collectivist nations. Oishi et al (1999) hypotheses based on Maslow's (1971) need theory and their own expectancy valence position, finding some support for each. They found that in poorer natio satisfaction with wealth was a stronger predictor of life satisfaction, where isfaction with home life was more predictive in wealthier nations, suggestin them a hierarchy of needs. They also found evidence that satisfaction with freed was less predictive of SWB in collectivistic nations than in individualistic They used this finding to dispute SDT's claims about the importance of volition t well-being, although their discussion reveals misconceptions about the meanin autonomy and about SDT's position on needs. Still, the findings reveal that deep held values play a role in well-being, a position with which SDT concurs.

A major conceptual issue in research on autonomy and well-being concerns the constant confusion in the literature between independence (nonreliance) a autonomy (volition). Cross-cultural psychologists such as Markus et al (199 equate autonomy with independence in their conceptions of East-West difference and thus do not examine the separate effects of these dimensions. Diener &amp; Lucas (2000) similarly cast autonomy as something one has 'from' other people, indicating their definition of autonomy as separateness or independence rather th self-endorsement or volition. This melding of constructs persists despite rese showing that, if anything, trusting interdependencies support the development more autonomous regulation (e.g. Ryan &amp; Lynch 1989). From an SDT perspective, cultural styles associated with independence should, of course, detract relatedness satisfaction and well-being, but this is a separate issue from the re to well-being of the relative autonomy of one's goals, life tasks, and values.

Indeed, evidence of the importance of autonomy is evident even in collectivi nations. Studies in Japan reveal that SDT-based assessments of autonomy predic the motivation and adjustment of students (e.g. Hayamizu 1997). Deci et al (2001 examined the relation of well-being to the satisfaction of autonomy, competenc and relatedness needs both in Bulgarian workers in state-owned, collectivistic managed companies and in a sample of US workers. They found that the measures of need satisfaction stood up to stringent cross-cultural meaning-equivalence teria, suggesting the generalizability of these constructs; they found furth satisfaction of these needs in the workplace significantly predicted the worke general well-being in each country, despite the highly differing cultural cont Evenmoreintriguing,meanlevelsofautonomyatworkwerehigherinBulgaria,for reasons made clear by ethnographic observations. Ryan et al (1999) studied goal inRussianandUScollegestudentsandfoundsupportforthemodelthatlowerwellbeing is predicted by overvaluing of extrinsic goals. Furthermore, Chirkov &amp; Rya (2001), also using means and covariance structure analyses, showed that Russia adolescents predictably viewed their parents and teachers as less autonomy su portive than did their US counterparts; however, despite its cultural normativen less perceived autonomy support was associated with lower well-being, includin SWB, in Russia, as well as in the United States.

Sen (1999), a Nobel laureate in economics, has gone so far as to argue that freedom is a more rational goal for national development than is gross nation product per se. His analysis shows that in cultures where relative freedoms ha been expanded, both quality of life and economic growth are enhanced. Similarly Frey &amp; Stutzer (1999) showed on a large sample of Swiss citizens that, whereas economic wealth was poorly predictive of well-being, citizens who were active i their democratic participation experienced higher well-being. Thus, without de ing either cultural variation in values or the importance of values in giving g their potency, we maintain that the positions that fail to recognize the import of autonomy for well-being may be inadvertently condoning the denial of human freedom to a significant portion of the inhabitants of the globe. Surely, this i will receive further study.

## SUMMARY

Cowen (1991) suggested that wellness should be defined not simply as the absence of psychopathology, but instead as an array of positive aspects of functioning are promoted by attainment of strong attachment relationships, acquisition of appropriate cognitive, interpersonal, and coping skills, and exposure to env ments that empower the person. This survey of recent work on well-being indicate clearly that study of the meaning of well-being, the conditions that engender it how it differs across place or time is yielding a rich and varied body of knowled on human wellness.

Interestingly, research on well-being had tended to fall into two general gr basedonwhatismeantbywell-being.Thehedonicviewpointfocusesonsubjectiv well-being, which is frequently equated with happiness and is formally defined more positive affect, less negative affect, and greater life satisfaction (e.g. Lucas 1999). In contrast, the eudaimonic viewpoint focuses on psychological wel being, which is defined more broadly in terms of the fully functioning person an hasbeenoperationalizedeitherasasetofsixdimensions(Ryff1989a),ashappi plus meaningfulness (McGregor &amp; Little 1998), or as a set of wellness variabl such as self-actualization and vitality (Ryan &amp; Deci 2000). Interestingly, de divisions over definitional and philosophical issues, the two research litera although to some degree overlapping, have tended to ask different questions a thus complement each other, providing an extensive picture of myriad person context, and cultural factors that relate to the nature and promotion of well Exciting findings have challenged old theories, raised new questions, and suppl nutriment for structured interventions to better the lives of people.

One also finds that researchers within the field of well-being are grappling wi an issue that cross-cuts all social sciences, namely that concerning cultur ativism versus universals in human nature. This issue will no doubt continue receive empirical attention, and it will likely be addressed by use of multi analytic strategies. That is, research will continue to uncover the relative pendent sources of variance in well-being owing to cultures and more proxima social contexts, as well as to between-person and within-person influences.

Perhapstheconcernofgreatestimportance,notonlyforpsychologicaltheori but also for humanity, is the study of the relations between personal well-b and the broader issues of the collective wellness of humanity and the wellne of the planet. It is clear that, as individuals pursue aims they find satisfy pleasurable, they may create conditions that make more formidable the attainme ofwell-beingbyothers.Animportantissue,therefore,concernstheextenttow factors that foster individual well-being can be aligned or made congruent w factors that facilitate wellness at collective or global levels. Such resea one would hope, point the way toward means through which individuals can seek hedonic or eudaimonic outcomes in ways that are sustainable in the context o the four billion others who also aspire to be fully functioning and satisfied i earthly life.

Sept 2025 01:07:38

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by grant MH-53385 from the National Institute of Mental Health.

## Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www.AnnualReviews.org

## LITERATURE CITED

- Ainsworth MDS, Blehar MC, Waters E, Wall S. 1978. Patterns of Attachment . Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
- revisited:Isitwhatyouwantorwhyyouwant it that matters? Psychol. Sci. 9:289-92
- Argyle M. 1987. The Psychology of Happiness . London: Methuen
- Baldwin MW, Keelan JPR, Fehr B, Enns V, Koh-Rangarajoo E. 1996. Social-cognitive conceptualization of attachment models: availability and accessibility effect. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 71:94-109
- Carver CS, Scheier MF. 1999. Themes and issuesintheself-regulationofbehavior.In Perspectives on Behavioral Self-Regulation: Advances in Social Cognition , ed. RS Wyer Jr, XII:1-105. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
- working Chirkov V, Ryan RM. 2001. Control versus autonomy support in Russia and the U.S.: effectsonwell-beingandacademicmotivation. J. Cross-Cultural Psychol. In press
- Christopher JC. 1999. Situating psychological well-being: exploring the cultural roots of its theory and research. J. Couns. Dev. 77:14152
- Baumeister R, Leary MR. 1995. The need to belong: desire for interpersonal attachments asafundamentalhumanmotivation. Psychol. Bull. 117:497-529
- Compton WC, Smith ML, Cornish KA, Qualls DL. 1996. Factor structure of mental health measures. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 71:406-13
- Bowlby J. 1969. Attachment . New York: Basic Brunstein JC. 1993. Personal goals and subjective well-being: a longitudinal study. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 65:1061-70
- Costa PT, McCrae RR. 1992. The five-factor model of personality and its relevance to personality disorders. J. Pers. Disord. 6:343-59
- Cowen EL. 1991. In pursuit of wellness. Am. Psychol. 46:404-8

IS.

- Brunstein JC, Schultheiss OC, Gr¨ assman R. 1998. Personal goals and emotional wellbeing: the moderating role of motive dispositions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 75:494-508
- Csikszentmihalyi M, Csikszentmihalyi 1988. Optimal Experience: Psychological StudiesofFlowinConsciousness .NewYork: Cambridge Univ. Press
- DeciEL.1975. IntrinsicMotivation .NewYork: Plenum
- Butzel JS, Ryan RM. 1997. The dynamics of volitional reliance: a motivational perspective on dependence, independence, and social support. In Sourcebook of Social Support and Personality , ed. GR Pierce, B Lakey, IG Sarason, BR Sarason, pp. 49-67. New York: Plenum
- Cacioppo JT, Berntson GG. 1999. The affect system: architecture and operating characteristics. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 8:133-37
- Carstensen LL. 1998. A life-span approach to social motivation. In Motivation and SelfRegulation Across the Life Span , ed. J Heckhausen, CS Dweck, pp. 341-64. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
- Deci EL, Ryan RM. 1991. A motivational approach to self: integration in personality. In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: Perspectives on Motivation ed. R Dienstbier, 38:237-88. Lincoln: Univ. Nebr. Press
- Carver CS, Baird E. 1998. The American dream
- Deci EL, Ryan RM. 2000. The 'what' and 'why' of goal pursuits: human needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychol. Inq. 11:227-68

Sept 2025 01:07:38

- encesbysubjectivewell-being. J. Inst. Theor. Econ. 155:755-78
- FrommE.1981.Primaryandsecondaryprocess in waking and in altered states of consciousness. Acad. Psychol. Bull. 3:29-45
- Gable SL, Reis HT. 1999. Now and then, them and us, this and that: studying relationships across time, partner, context, and person. Pers. Relat. 6:415-32
- Deci EL, Ryan RM, Gagn´e M, Leone DR, Usunov J, Kornazheva BP. 2001. Need satisfaction, motivation, and well-being in the work organizations of a former Eastern Bloc country: a cross-cultural study of selfdetermination. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. In press
- DeNeve KM. 1999. Happy as an extraverted clam? The role of personality for subjective well-being. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 8:141-44
- DeNeve KM, Cooper H. 1998. The happy personality: a meta-analysis of 137 personality traits and subjective well-being. Psychol. Bull. 124:197-229
- Hayamizu T. 1997. Between intrinsic and extrinsicmotivation:examinationofreasonsfor academic study based on the theory of internalization. Jpn. Psychol. Res. 39:98-108
- DienerE.1984.Subjectivewell-being. Psychol. Bull. 95:542-75
- Hazan C, Shaver P. 1987. Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 52:511-24
- Diener E, Diener M. 1995. Cross-cultural correlates of life satisfaction and self-esteem. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 68:653-63
- Diener E, Lucas RE. 1999. Personality and subjective well-being. See Kahneman et al 1999, pp. 213-29
- Headey B, Wearing A. 1989. Personality, life events, and subjective well-being: toward a dynamic equilibrium model. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 57:731-39
- Higgins ET, Kruglanski AW, eds. 1996. Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles . New York: Guilford
- Kahneman D. 1999. Objective happiness. See Kahneman et al 1999, pp. 3-25
- Kahneman D, Diener E, Schwarz N, eds. 1999. Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology . New York: Russell Sage Found.
- Diener E, Lucas RE. 2000. Subjective emotional well-being. In Handbook of Emotions , ed. M Lewis, JM Haviland, pp. 325-37. New York: Guilford. 2nd ed.
- Kasser T, Ryan RM. 1993. A dark side of the American dream: correlates of financial success as a central life aspiration. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 65:410-22
- Diener E, Sandvik E, Pavot W. 1991. Happiness is the frequency, not the intensity, of positiveversusnegativeaffect.In SubjectiveWellBeing: An Interdisciplinary Perspective , ed. F Strack, M Argyle, N Schwarz, pp. 119-39. New York: Pergamon
- Diener E, Sapyta JJ, Suh E. 1998. Subjective well-being is essential to well-being. Psychol. Inq. 9:33-37
- Elliot AJ, Sheldon KM. 1997. Avoidance achievement motivation: a personal analysis. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73:17185
- Kasser T, Ryan RM. 1996. Further examining the American dream: differential correlates of intrinsic and extrinsic goals. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 22:280-87
- goals Kasser VM, Ryan RM. 1999. The relation of psychological needs for autonomy and relatedness to health, vitality, well-being and mortality in a nursing home. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 29:935-54
- King LA, Napa CK. 1998. What makes life good? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 75:156-65
- Elliot AJ, Sheldon KM, Church MA. 1997. Avoidance personal goals and subjective well-being. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 23:91527
- KingLA,PennebakerJW.1998.What'ssogreat about feeling good? Psychol. Inq. 9:53-56
- Kubovy M. 1999. On the pleasures of the mind. See Kahneman et al 1999, pp. 134-54
- Emmons RA. 1986. Personal strivings: an approach to personality and subjective wellbeing. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51:1058-68
- Frey BS, Stutzer A. 1999. Measuring prefer-

Sept 2025 01:07:38

- Mroczek DK, Kolarz CM. 1998. The effect of age on positive and negative affect: a developmental perspective on happiness. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 75:1333-49
- Myers DG. 1999. Close relationships and quality of life. See Kahneman et al 1999, pp. 37491
- La Guardia JG, Ryan RM, Couchman C, Deci EL. 2000. Within-person variation in security of attachment: a self-determination theory perspective on attachment, need fulfillment, and well-being. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 79:367-84
- Larsen RJ, Diener E. 1987. Affect intensity as an individual difference characteristic: a review. J. Res. Pers. 21:1-39
- Lee GR, Ishii-Kuntz M. 1987. Social interaction, loneliness, and emotional well-being among the elderly. Res. Aging 9:459-82
- Nezlek JB. 2000. The motivational and cognitive dynamics of day-to-day social life. In TheSocialMind:CognitiveandMotivational Aspects of Interpersonal Behaviour , ed. JP Forgas, K Williams, L Wheeler, pp. 92-111. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
- Nix G, Ryan RM, Manly JB, Deci EL. 1999. Revitalizationthroughself-regulation:theeffects of autonomous versus controlled motivation on happiness and vitality. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35:266-84
- LittleBR.1989.Personalprojectsanalysis:trivial pursuits and magnificent obsessions, and the search for coherence. In Personality Psychology: Recent Trends and Emerging Directions , ed. D Buss, N Cantor, pp. 15-31. New York: Springer-Verlag
- Oishi S, Diener E, Lucas RE, Suh E. 1999. Cross-cultural variations in predictors of life satisfaction:perspectivesfromneedsandvalues. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:980-90

well-

- Little TD. 1997. Mean and covariance structures (MACS) analyses of cross-cultural data: practical and theoretical issues. Multiv. Behav. Res. 32:53-76
- preOkun MA, Stock WA, Haring MJ, Witter RA. 1984. The social activity/subjective being relation: a quantitative synthesis. Res. Aging 6:45-65
- Lyubomirsky S, Ross L. 1999. Changes in attractiveness of elected, rejected, and cluded alternatives: a comparison of happy and unhappy individuals. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76:988-1007
- Lyubomirsky S, Tucker KL. 1998. Implications of individual differences in subjective happiness for perceiving, interpreting, and thinkingaboutlifeevents. Motiv.Emot. 22:155-86
- Parrott WG. 1993. Beyond hedonism: motives for inhibiting good moods and for maintaining bad moods. In Handbook of Mental Control , ed. DM Wegner, JW Pennebaker, pp. 278-305. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
- Peterson C. 1999. Personal control and wellbeing.SeeKahnemanetal1999,pp.288-301
- Markus HR, Kitayama S, Heiman RJ. 1996. Culture and basic psychological principles. See Higgins &amp; Kruglanski 1996, pp. 857913
- Maslow AH. 1971. The Farther Reaches of Human Nature . New York: Viking
- Reis HT, Patrick BC. 1996. Attachment and intimacy: component process. See Higgins &amp; Kruglanski 1996, pp. 523-63
- well Reis HT, Sheldon KM, Gable SL, Roscoe J, Ryan RM. 2000. Daily well-being: the role of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 26:419-35
- McGregor I, Little BR. 1998. Personal projects, happiness, and meaning: on doing and being yourself. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 74:494-512
- and Roberts BW, Donahue EM. 1994. One personality, multiple selves: integrating personality and social roles. J. Pers. 62:199-218
- Rogers C. 1963. The actualizing tendency in relation to 'motives' and to consciousness. In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation , ed. MR
- Mikulincer M, Florian V. 1998. The relationship between adult attachment styles emotional and cognitive reactions to stressful events. In Attachment Theory and Close Relationships , ed. JA Simpson, WS Rholes, pp. 143-65. New York: Guilford

- Ryff CD, Singer B. 1998. The contours of positive human health. Psychol. Inq. 9:1-28
- Ryff CD, Singer B. 2000. Interpersonal flourishing: a positive health agenda for the new millennium. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 4:30-44
- Jones, 11:1-24. Lincoln: Univ. Nebr. Press Ryan RM, Chirkov VI, Little TD, Sheldon KM, Timoshina E, Deci EL. 1999. The American dream in Russia: extrinsic aspirations in two cultures. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:150924
- Ryan RM, Deci EL. 2000. Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am. Psychol. 55:68-78
- Ryan RM, Frederick CM. 1997. On energy, personality and health: subjective vitality as a dynamic reflection of well-being. J. Pers. 65:529-65
- Ryff CD, Singer BH, Wing E, Love GD. 2001. Elective affinities and uninvited agonies: mapping emotion with significant others onto health. In Emotion, Social Relationships, and Health: Third Annual Wisconsin Symposium on Emotion , ed. CD Ryff, BH Singer. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. In press
- basic Schmuck P, Kasser T, Ryan RM. 2000. The relationship of well-being to intrinsic and extrinsic goals in Germany and the U.S. Soc. Indic. Res. 50:225-41
- span. Schmutte PS, Ryff CD. 1997. Personality and well-being: reexamining methods and meanings. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73:549-59
- Schwarz N, Strack F. 1991. Evaluating one's life: a judgment model of subjective wellbeing. In Subjective Well-Being: An Interdisciplinary Perspective , ed. F Strack, M Argyle, pp. 27-47. Oxford, UK: Pergamon
- Ryan RM, La Guardia JG. 2000. What is being optimized over development? A selfdetermination theory perspective on psychological needs across the life In Psychology and the Aging Revolution , ed. SH Qualls, N Abeles, pp. 145-72. Washington, DC: APA Books. In press
- Ryan RM, Lynch J. 1989. Emotional autonomy versusdetachment:revisitingthevicissitudes of adolescence and young adulthood. Child Dev. 60:340-56
- Seidlitz L. 1993. Agreeableness , conscientiousness , and openness as related to subjective well-being . Presented at 6th Meet. Int. Soc. Study Individ. Differ., Baltimore, MD
- Ryff CD. 1989a. Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of psychological well-being. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 57:1069-81
- Seligman M, Csikszentmihalyi M. 2000. Positive psychology: an introduction. Am. Psychol. 55:5-14
- Sen A. 1999. Development as Freedom . New York: Knopf
- Ryff CD. 1989b. In the eye of the beholder: views of psychological well-being among middle-aged and older adults. Psychol. Aging 4:195-210
- RyffCD.1991.Possibleselvesinadulthoodand old age: a tale of shifting horizons. Psychol. Aging 6:286-95
- Ryff CD. 1995. Psychological well-being in adult life. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 4:99-104
- Sheldon KM, Elliot AJ. 1999. Goal striving, need satisfaction, and longitudinal wellbeing: the self-concordance model. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76:482-97
- Ryff CD, Keyes CLM. 1995. The structure of psychological well-being revisited. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 69:719-27
- Sheldon KM, Kasser T. 1995. Coherence and congruence: two aspects of personality integration. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 68:531-43
- Sheldon KM, Kasser T. 1998. Pursuing personal goals: Skills enable progress, but not all progress is beneficial. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 24:1319-31
- Sheldon KM, Ryan RM, Rawsthorne LJ, Ilardi B. 1997. 'Trait' self and 'true' self:
- Ryff CD, Magee WJ, Kling KC, Wing EH. 1999. Forging macro-micro linkages in the study of psychological well-being. In The Self and Society in Aging Processes , ed. CD Ryff, VW Marshall, pp. 247-78. New York: Springer

- norms. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 74:482-93
- cross-role variation in the big five personality traits and its relations with psychological authenticity and subjective well-being. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73:1380-93
- Sheldon KM, Ryan RM, Reis HT. 1996. What makes for a good day? Competence and autonomy in the day and in the person. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 22:1270-79
- Tooby J, Cosmides L. 1992. The psychological foundations of culture. In The Adapted Mind: EvolutionaryPsychologyandtheGeneration of Culture , ed. JH Barkow, L Cosmides, J Tooby, pp. 19-136. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
- Uchino BN, Uno D, Holt-Lunstad J. 1999. Social support, physiological processes, health. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 8:145-48
- Shizgal P. 1999. On the neural computation of utility: See Kahneman et al 1999, pp. 500-24
- Simpson JA. 1990. Influence of attachment styles on romantic relationships. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 59:971-80
- Suh E, Diener E, Fujita F. 1996. Events and subjectivewell-being:Onlyrecenteventsmatter. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 70:1091-102

and

- Vallerand RJ. 1997. Toward a hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , ed. MP Zanna, 29:271-360. San Diego, CA: Academic
- HC. Waterman AS. 1993. Two conceptions of happiness: contrasts of personal expressiveness (eudaimonia) and hedonic enjoyment. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 64:678-91
- Suh E, Diener E, Oishi S, Triandis 1998. The shifting basis of life satisfaction judgements across cultures: emotions versus