## Misuse and Diversion of Stimulants Prescribed for ADHD: A Systematic Review of the Literature

TIMOTHY E. WILENS, M.D., LENARD A. ADLER, M.D., JILL ADAMS, PH.D., STEPHANIE SGAMBATI, M.A., JOHN ROTROSEN, M.D., ROBERT SAWTELLE, B.A., LINSEY UTZINGER, B.A., AND STEVEN FUSILLO, B.S.

## ABSTRACT

Objective: Recent studies have provided variable information on the frequency and context of diversion and the use of nonprescribed and prescribed stimulant medications in adolescent and young adult populations. The purpose of this systematic review of the literature is to evaluate the extent and characteristics of stimulant misuse and diversion in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and non-ADHD individuals. Method: Weconducted a systematic review of the literature of available studies looking at misuse and diversion of prescription ADHD medications using misuse , diversion , stimulants , illicit use , and ADHD medications as key words for the search. Results: We identified 21 studies representing 113,104 subjects. The studies reported rates of past year nonprescribed stimulant use to range from 5% to 9% in grade school Y and high school Y age children and 5% to 35% in college-age individuals. Lifetime rates of diversion ranged from 16% to 29% of students with stimulant prescriptions asked to give, sell, or trade their medications. Recent work suggests that whites, members of fraternities and sororities, individuals with lower grade point averages, use of immediate-release compared to extended-release preparations, and individuals who report ADHD symptoms are at highest risk for misusing and diverting stimulants. Reported reasons for use, misuse, and diversion of stimulants include to concentrate, improve alertness, ''get high,'' or to experiment. Conclusions: The literature suggests that individuals both with and without ADHD misuse stimulant medications. Recent work has begun to document the context, motivation, and demographic profile of those most at risk for using, misusing, and diverting stimulants. The literature highlights the need to carefully monitor high-risk individuals for the use of nonprescribed stimulants and educate individuals with ADHD as to the pitfalls of the misuse and diversion of the stimulants. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 2008;47(1):21 Y 31. Key Words: stimulants, misuse, abuse, diversion, illicit use.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a prominent neurobehavioral disorder occurring in 6% to 8% of children and 4% to 5% of adults

Accepted August 30, 2007.

Dr. Wilens, Ms. Sgambati, Mr. Sawtelle, Ms. Utzinger, and Mr. Fusillo are with the Pediatric Psychopharmacology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School; Drs. Adler, Adams, and Rotrosen are with the New York University School of Medicine and VA New York Harbor Healthcare System.

This study was funded by grants from the National Institute of Drug Abuse U10 DA15831 and U10 DA13046, (Dr. Roger Weiss, PI); R01 DA012945 and K24 DA016264 (Dr. Timothy Wilens, PI).

Correspondence to Dr. Timothy Wilens, Massachusetts General Hospital, Pediatric Psychopharmacology Research, 32 Fruit Street, Suite YAW 6A, Boston, MA 02114; e-mail: twilens@partners.org.

0890-8567/07/4701-0021 /C211 2007 by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.

DOI: 10.1097/chi.0b013e31815a56f1

worldwide. 1 Y 3 It is one of the major clinical and public health problems because of its associated morbidity and disability in youths and adults. 4 Medications including both stimulants and nonstimulants (e.g., atomoxetine) are increasingly recognized to contribute to long-term optimal outcome in ADHD. 5 Y 8

Stimulants, namely amphetamine (AMPH) and methylphenidate (MPH), are U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved and remain among the medications of choice for ADHD. 9 Y 11 An extensive literature indicates both the short-term (for review, see Wilens et al., 10 Barkley, 12 and Greenhill and Osman 13 ) and longer term effectiveness and tolerability of the stimulants in ADHD. 5 Y 7,14 Based on the 2003 National Survey of Children \_ s Health, 15 of the 7.8% (4.4 million) of U.S. children ages 4 to 17 years who

had received a lifetime ADHD diagnosis, 56% (2.5 million) were prescribed ADHD medications (4.3% of the U.S. population ages 4 Y 17).

Although useful in the treatment of ADHD, stimulants are controlled II substances with a history of preclinical and human studies showing potential abuse liability. 16,17 In recent human studies, the stimulants MPH and AMPH have been associated with more likeability and euphorogenic effects than nonscheduled agents such as desipramine or atomoxetine, agents also used in ADHD. 18 Hence, although the literature clearly indicates important therapeutic effects of stimulants, long-standing preclinical and human studies highlight the liability for behavioral reinforcement and ultimately dependence (e.g., abuse liability) of the same stimulants used in the treatment of ADHD. 16,17 Moreover, public health data on the nonmedical misuse of stimulant and other classes of agents by the public are increasingly available. For example, the 2005 National Survey on Drug Use and Health reported that 4.7 million and 1.1 million Americans ages 12 and older used pain relievers and stimulants, respectively, nonmedically in the month before the survey. 19

Recent studies have provided variable information on the frequency and context of misuse (i.e., for the purpose of this review, using more than prescribed or using nonprescribed stimulants) and diversion. Our understanding of stimulant misuse in populations with and without ADHD has important and directly applicable clinical and public health relevance. By better integrating the emerging data related to misuse and diversion of prescription stimulants in adolescent or college students with and without ADHD, improvements in the clinical management of individuals with ADHD as well as in the prevention and identification of individuals at high risk for stimulant misuse may be evident. The purpose of this systematic review of the literature is to evaluate the extent and context of stimulant misuse in individuals with and without ADHD. To this end, we performed a systematic review of the literature seeking answers to three specific questions: What is the rate of misuse of ADHD stimulant medications in adolescents and young adults both with and without ADHD? What is the rate of diversion of ADHD stimulant medications? Who is at greatest risk and in what context do misuse and diversion occur?

## METHOD

We conducted a systematic literature search of all of the available studies looking at patterns of misuse and diversion of prescription ADHDmedications. We searched journal articles through PubMed at the National Library of Medicine using misuse , diversion , stimulants , illicit use , and ADHD medications as key words and searched from 1995 to 2006. These data were supplemented with data from one presentation at a national scientific meeting, obtained outside the systematic literature search parameters.

Included were English-language articles assessing use, misuse, abuse, and/or diversion of ADHD stimulant medications MPH or AMPH in children, adolescents, or adults. Excluded were studies that did not systematically document use, misuse, abuse, or diversion of ADHD stimulants. We did not include studies that only examined other psychostimulant misuse or abuse including cocaine or methamphetamine. The literature search yielded a total of 33 abstracts, of which 21 articles met sufficient criteria for inclusion.

Because the definitions of the inappropriate use of stimulants differed among studies and for general discussion, we collapsed preexisting definitions such as the illicit use of stimulants, 20 Y 22 nonmedical use of stimulants, 23 and other similar definitions (stimulant misuse or abuse) of the term misuse that include taking ADHD prescriptions not prescribed to the individual or taking ADHD prescriptions differently than they were prescribed (e.g., more than prescribed, taking with alcohol or other drugs). Diversion of stimulants was defined as the transfer of ADHD prescriptions medications from one individual who does have a prescription to another individual who does not have a prescription. This transfer includes the selling, trading, or giving away prescription medications. Abuse and dependence were generally defined by DSM criteria 24 and refer to persistent maladaptive patterns of alcohol or drug use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress.

## RESULTS

In all, using our search parameters, we identified 21 studies including 113,145 study participants. Nineteen studies were survey studies, one study was by direct structured interviews of the subjects, one study included data collected using survey and direct interviews, and one study was a chart review. Studies included participants from elementary, junior, or senior high school students ( n = 4), college students ( n = 12), or mixed age groups ( n = 6). Ascertainment of studies was from school or colleges ( n = 17), samples of individuals with ADHD( n = 1), substance use treatment centers ( n = 2), or national drug use surveys ( n = 2).

## Studies of Stimulant Misuse

Past year prevalence of stimulant misuse ranged from 5% to 9% in grade school Y and high school Y age children and 5% to 35% in college-age individuals (Table 1). There are few studies of stimulant misuse among middle to senior high school students. Poulin 23,25

completed two self-report survey studies in Canadian students in grades 7 to 12. A recent survey study of 12,990 students in grades 7 to 12 found that 6.6% and 8.7% had used nonprescribed MPH or AMPH, respectively, in the year before the survey. 23 McCabe and colleagues 21 studied 1,536 U.S. students in grades 6 to 11 using a self-administered Internet-based survey and found that 5% reported lifetime stimulant misuse (referred to as illicit use by the authors). In a case review, Klein-Schwartz and McGrath 26 evaluated 759 cases reported to a poison center in terms of experience of MPH use in adolescents. They reported a threefold increase in MPH-related adverse experiences between 1993 and 1999, similar to that reported earlier by Marsh et al. 27

More recent literature has focused on the important group of older adolescents and young adults attending college. McCabe and Boyd 28 surveyed more than 9,000 undergraduate university students with a Web-based self-report questionnaire (50% response rate) and found that 5% were misusing stimulants within the past year and showed that this group was often using and abusing other substances concomitantly. McCabe and colleagues 29 also evaluated using a self-administered survey via mail more than 10,000 randomly selected students from 119 colleges and found that 6.9% had a lifetime use history and 2.1% had a pastmonth use history of prescription stimulants: aggregated in white males, students in fraternities/sororities, and students with lower grade point averages. Although helpful, this study did not measure medical use of stimulants and focused exclusively on immediaterelease (IR) forms. In a sample of 283 college students, Babcock and Byrne 30 found that 17% reported ever having misused MPH; the study did not inquire about other stimulant misuse. Low and Gendaszek, 31 in a smaller survey study of 150 undergraduates in a psychology class, found that 35% had reported stimulant misuse (MPH or AMPH), which they define as without a prescription within the past year; 80% of those claimed the use was for performance enhancement. Similar findings of increased use of other drugs of abuse (e.g., cocaine, methylenedioxymethamphetamine [Ecstasy]) were noted in those misusing stimulants relative to those not misusing stimulants. Barrett et al. 32 reported on 100 students, half of whom were misusing nonprescribed MPH and the other half B controls. [ This study used structured interviews and found that

70% of the group used MPH recreationally and 30% for studying during their lifetime. Using Web-based surveys of 1,025 undergraduates, White et al. 33 evaluated and reported that 16% misused stimulants in their lifetime.

More recently, Kroutil et al. 34 reported on an analysis from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health. In this study 0.9% of those surveyed had misused ADHD stimulants (not including methamphetamine) nonmedically within the past year in the 12- to 17-year-old group, and 1.3% of those similarly in the 18-to 25-year-old group. Of current B users, [ approximately 10% Y 15% had current dependence on stimulants. In applying DSM-IV criteria to define both stimulant dependence (at least three of seven DSM-IV criteria) and abuse (more DSM-IV criteria but not dependent), the authors reported that clinical features of stimulant dependence predominated among adult stimulant misusers, and clinical features of abuse predominated among youths. No data were available on concomitant psychiatric disorders or substance abuse (SA). Whereas females were as likely as males to report stimulant misuse, whites had greater misuse rates than African Americans, and metropolitan areas more so than rural areas.

## Studies of Diversion

Occurring in grade school Y and high school Y age children are requests for individuals with ADHD stimulant prescriptions to sell, trade, or give away their medications. Using a self-reported survey through the mail, Musser et al. 35 reported that 16% of children in a sample of grade school and high school students were asked to give, sell, or trade their medications. Moreover, this investigator also reported that 4% of the sample had their medications stolen. 35 McCabe et al. 21 found that 23% of his college-age sample with diagnosed ADHD and a prescription were approached to give, sell, or trade their medications in their lifetime. Although helpful, no information on whether students agreed to sell, give, or trade their medications is available. In their initial survey study, Poulin 25 found that of the 5.3% of high school Y age individuals who reported having ADHD prescriptions, 15% gave them away, 7% sold them, and 4% (95% CI 2.7% Y 5.9%) had medications stolen over the course of their lifetime. More recently, Poulin 23 reported that, of 264 students prescribed MPH, 24% had given and 19% had sold

TABLE 1

Review of Misuse and Diversion Studies

| Comments boys Information available on charts may limited; agency providing the charts treats SUD Self-selected sample of respondents; blank answers scored B no [ ; no ADHD status Several types of stimulants included in the nonmedical stimulant use category were different from those included in the medical stimulant use category students with prescriptions were considered nonabusers; single-site study from small competitive college differences in characteristics increasing odds of stimulant dependence Stimulant misuse: no sex differences; more alcohol, drug, and cigarette use. Stimulant misusers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Results y 71% of sample was prescribed 1+ ADHD medications at time of study; of those, 16% were asked to sell, give, or trade their medications, 4% had medications stolen y Significant increase in MPH misuse from 1992 to 1996, especially among white adolescents 17% of sample reported ever having used MPH recreationally; 13% reported lifetime intranasal use 5.3% of sample was prescribed stimulants in past year; of those prescribed stimulants, 14.7% gave away, 7.3% sold, and 4.3% (95% CI 2.7% Y 5.9%) had medications stolen in the past year 36% report past-year misuse of stimulants; misuse associated with use of cocaine and MDMA meet for past-year stimulant dependence; females more likely meet for stimulant dependence than males; more stimulant dependence in people <26 y illicit MPH misuse (2% since junior high, 19% since high school, 79% since college) |
| Age Group Median 14 y; range 10 Y 21 Mean 15.6 y; range 11 Y 20 Mean 21 y Mean 15.2 y Mean 20 y Q 12 y 19% Mean 20.1 T 1.7 y 3%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Type of Study Self-reported student survey via mail Chart review Self-reported college survey via mail Self-reported written student drug use survey administered in school Self-reported written survey National Household Survey on Drug Abuse; personal interviews conducted in-home Self-report Web-based student life survey                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Ascertainment al. 35 103 children previously identified as Ritalin responders al. 27 240 charts randomly selected from 1,183 adolescent patient records at an outpatient substance abuse treatment facility and 283 students at a public liberal arts college 13,549 students in grades 7, 9, 10, 12 31 Convenience sample of 150 undergraduates in a psychology class at a small, competitive U.S. college Schlenger 39 1,047 individuals reporting nonmedical stimulant use in a national survey al. 20 Random sample of 2,250 undergraduates at large public university                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Reference Musser et Marsh et Babcock Byrne 30 Poulin 25 Low and Gendaszek Wu and Teter et                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 47:1, JANUARY 2008

| Did not assess for quantity, frequency, or reasons of misuse                                                                                                                                               | Men _ s misuse predicted by knowing where to get stimulants, while women _ s misuse predicted by being offered stimulants Self-selected sample; immediate vs. ER MPH not distinguished   | year, Did not use DSM substance abuse and dependence criteria; 30% have unknown drug source; no sex difference in motivation; high rates of other drug use     | Variation between colleges (0% Y 25% past-year use); Ritalin, Dexedrine, and Adderall only High percentage of subjects   | [ had ADHD symptoms; results relate to substance use, not DSM dependence/ abuse; 60% female                                                    | Most misuse involved prescription medications; misusers were not asked about ADHD treatment                               | All white; lack of psychometric evaluation of questionnaire; IR misuse/diversion exclusively Similar male/female use pattern; motivation: B party, [ improve grades, pay attention   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 4.5% reported lifetime stimulant misuse; 23% of those with prescriptions were asked to sell, give, or trade medications in their lifetime y 17% men and 11% women reported stimulant misuse for recreation | and academics y 70% misused stimulants recreationally, 30% for studying over their lifetime; those misusing stimulants report more drug use overall                                      | 5.4% misusing stimulants in past 68% obtaining drugs from peers; more binge drinking in stimulant misusers; motivation: 58% to concentrate, 43% alertness, 43% | get high, 14% other Lifetime stim misuse, 6.9%; past-year use, 4.1%; past-month use, 2.1%                                | 23% of sample was ever prescribed ADHD medications; of those, 25% used medications to B get high, 29% gave/sold medications in their lifetime  | 40% of those with lifetime ADHD medication misuse reported using them exclusively; misuse of ER less than IR preparations | y 11% of ADHD selling and 22% of ADHD misusing meds in the past 4 y 16% misused or abused stimulants in their lifetime, 96% of them prefer MPH; 40% intranasal use                   |
| Web conducted Grades 6 Y 11 Mean 19.4 T 1.7                                                                                                                                                                | Mean 21 T 2.6                                                                                                                                                                            | Undergraduates                                                                                                                                                 | mail Undergraduates                                                                                                      | and and Mean 20.6 y                                                                                                                            | on Health; one-to-one Q 12 y                                                                                              | interviews psychiatric Mean 20.8 T 5 paper surveys Q 17 Y 24 y                                                                                                                       |
| Self-administered survey in-school 381undergraduatestudents Student self-reported written survey via mail and in-person                                                                                    | Standardized, face-to-face, structured interviews of all participants                                                                                                                    | Self-administered Web-based student life survey                                                                                                                | Self-administered survey: college alcohol study                                                                          | sample of students from a 4-year college Self-reported survey conducted in-class; Core Alcohol Drug Survey Current Symptom Scale Y Self-Report | National Survey Drug Use and in-home, interviews and self-administered                                                    | computer-aided ADHD; Self-report questionnaire and structured interviews Web-based and                                                                                               |
| 21 1,536 students grades 6 Y 11                                                                                                                                                                            | 32 N = 100 (50% reporting MPH misuse, 50% controls)                                                                                                                                      | al. 22 Random sample of 9,161 undergraduates of large public midwestern U.S. university                                                                        | et al. 29 10,904 randomly selected students from 119 four-year colleges                                                  | Convenience 334 predominantly state                                                                                                            | 54,079 people                                                                                                             | N = 98; 56% 44% control 33 1,025 undergraduates                                                                                                                                      |
| McCabe et al. et al. 40                                                                                                                                                                                    | Barrett et al.                                                                                                                                                                           | et al. 38 McCabe and Boyd 28 McCabe et                                                                                                                         | McCabe                                                                                                                   | Upadhyaya al. 37                                                                                                                               | Kroutil et al. 34                                                                                                         | Wilens et al. 36 White et al.                                                                                                                                                        |

## (Continued on next page)

TABLE 1

(continued)

Note: ADHD = attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; MPH = methylphenidate; SUD = substance use disorder; CI = confidence interval; MDMA = methylenedioxymethamphetamine (Ecstasy); dep = dependence; ER = extended release; IR = immediate release; AMPH = amphetamine; THC = tetrahydrocannabinol.

| Comments Whites and Hispanics 3 times more misuse than African Americans and 2 times more than Asians; motive: study (60%), alertness (48%), B get high [ (31%), experimentation (30%) High rate of comorbid SUD (81%) Only MPH and AMPH; males, alcohol, cigarette and THC use, and positive screening for ADHD and depression were correlated with stimulant misuse Variable methodologies; stimulant misuse associated with greater alcohol, drug, and cigarette use and more ADHD symptoms; IR > ER for stimulant misuse                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Results 8.3% lifetime stimulant misuse; 5.9% past-year misuse (76% Adderall, 25% Ritalin, 96% oral, 38% intranasal) 22% reported abuse; 81% IR, 16% ER, 2.7% both 6% with ADHD; 2.8% of sample reported medical stimulant use; 6.6% and 8.7% of sample reported misuse of MPH and AMPH, respectively, in past year Past-year stimulant misuse: 5% Y 9% in grade school and high school children and 5% Y 35% in college-age individuals; lifetime diversion rates: 16% Y 29% of students with stimulant prescriptions asked to give, sell, or trade medications |
| Age Group Mean 20 T 2.0 y 18 Y 25 y (36%) 14.9 y 19% of studies assessed grade school and high school students; 52% assessed college students; 29% assessed a mixed age group                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Type of Study Web-based survey Questionnaire Self-reported student drug use survey 76% survey studies; 5% chart review; 5% direct structured interview; 15% both survey and direct structured interview                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Ascertainment 4,580 full-time undergraduates at large midwestern U.S. university 335 people in ADHD treatment center 12,990 grade school and high school students 113,145 study participants                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Reference Teter et al. 41 Bright et al. 42 Poulin 23 Total: 21 studies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

their medication in the 30 days before the survey. Of interest, 6% had indicated that medication had been B coerced [ or stolen from them. 23 Junior and senior high school students were more likely to obtain stimulants not prescribed to them more easily if a student in the classroom was taking prescribed stimulants. 23

As part of a longitudinal follow-up of youths with ADHD, Wilens et al. 36 queried 98 adults with ADHD and control adults (mean age 21 years) and found that 11% of individuals with diagnosed ADHD and a prescription had sold their medications during the past 4 years. These investigators also found that subjects with ADHD who misused (escalating dose) or skipped their stimulants to use drugs or alcohol were more likely to divert (sell) their medication. 36 Along the same lines, Upadhyaya et al. 37 reported on a survey study of 334 undergraduate college students. They found that among students with ADHD and prescriptions, 29% had sold their ADHD medications in their lifetime.

## Context of Stimulant Misuse/Abuse and Diversion

Some of the most recent work on patterns of misuse and diversion has begun to outline the context and in which individual misuse takes place. This includes different patterns of use as a function of demographic features (sex, race, socioeconomic status), psychiatric and substance use disorders, type of college attended, medication preference, route of administration, coadministration with other substances, and details as to how, for how much, and from whom prescription drugs are obtained. 21 Y 23,33,34,38 Y 40

Studies highlight variable sex differences in stimulant misuse. For instance, whereas Teter et al. 38 and Poulin 23 found that men reported more misuse than women, Wu and Schlenger 39 found that female stimulant misusers were more likely to develop dependence than male users. Hall et al. 40 found men \_ s misuse to be predicted by knowing how to obtain stimulants, and women \_ s misuse was predicted by being offered stimulants. McCabe et al. 22 found a sex difference in that women reported more medical use, whereas men reported more misuse of stimulants, and another study found similar rates of stimulant misuse patterns in males and females. 33

There have been few analyses of how race or socioeconomic status differs in groups that misuse or divert prescription stimulants. A higher incidence of misuse among whites has been reported. 21,34 Recently Teter et al. 41 reported more specifically that the rate of misuse of nonprescribed medications in whites and Hispanics is three times the rate in African American populations and two times the rate in Asian American populations. None of the studies specifically documented the relationship between rates of misuse and diversion and social class.

Motivation for use of stimulants outside prescription use has been documented in some of the most recent literature. Upadhyaya et al. 37 reported in a survey study of 334 undergraduate college students misusing stimulants that a higher than expected group of respondents had ADHD symptoms, although a formal diagnosis of ADHD was not undertaken. Preliminary evidence emerged, indicating that those individuals with higher baseline ADHD symptoms (independent of a formal diagnosis) were at higher risk for misuse of stimulants, calling into question whether this group may have been self-medicating their ADHD symptoms with illegally obtained stimulants. More specifically addressing these issues, Teter and colleagues 38 found that 58% of college students misusing stimulants reported using stimulants to concentrate, 43% for alertness, 43% to B get high, [ and 14% for other motivation. In an independent sample from the same group, 41 60% of those misused stimulants to study, 48% to improve alertness, 31% used to B get high, [ and 30% for experimentation. White et al. 33 found motivations associated with stimulant misuse to be B partying, [ improving grades and paying attention. No sex differences in motivation for use have emerged in these studies. As part of a longitudinal study of ADHD, Wilens et al 36 reported that 22% took higher doses than prescribed or misused their own prescribed medication, 10% B got high [ on their medication, and 16% of subjects with ADHD withheld their medication around times of using drugs or alcohol. Poulin found a higher risk for stimulant misuse in association with depressive symptoms and a positive screen for ADHD. This investigator also found a higher risk for misuse of stimulants in junior and senior high school students if other students in the classroom were prescribed stimulants. 23

Data are also available on the preference of misused stimulants. Whereas in an undergraduate survey study White et al. 33 noted that 96% of their sample preferred MPH, Teter et al. 41 reported on another college-age

survey with 4,580 responses that 75% of stimulant misusers were using AMPH and the remainder MPH. In another survey study, Kroutil et al. 34 reported that the majority of past-year nonmedical use involved stimulants other than MPH (d-AMPH, mixed AMPH salts, and pemoline) and Poulin 23 reported relatively similar rates of AMPH and MPH nonmedical use in 7th to 12th grade students.

Most misuse of stimulants was by oral administration. White et al. 33 reported that her sample \_ s preferred route of administration was oral, although 40% of respondents reported intranasal administration as well. Teter et al. 41 reported that 96% of respondents reported oral administration with 38% reporting intranasal administration as well.

Additional work has focused on the relative abuse liability of IR compared to extended-release (ER) preparations of stimulants. One signal was elicited from a paper highlighting stimulant misuse that was derived from the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 34 In this study, whereas the estimated number of lifetime users (in thousands T SE) was 4,524 T 210 with the short-acting MPH, it was only 5 T 2 with ER OROS MPH (however, the authors cautioned about the difficulty in estimating nonmedical use among ER users because of low numbers). Similar data were not available for IR versus ER AMPH products (although a similar trend was noted with Dexedrine (d-AMPH) having higher rates of users than the IR mixed AMPH salts (3,360 T 226 versus 245 T 25, respectively), despite the greater use of mixed AMPH salts for ADHD. 34 Similarly, Wilens et al. 36 found that only the IR and not the ER forms of stimulants were misused or diverted in their sample of college-age youths with ADHD, albeit limited by the increased exposure to IR versus ER in the period of assessment.

More recently, Bright and Delphia 42 presented data on misuse and abuse in a sample of 335 adults with ADHD, the majority with an SA history (81%). Twenty-two percent reported abusing their prescribed stimulants, with the vast majority of that group misusing IR preparations (81%) followed distantly by either ER (16%) or both IR and ER preparations (3%).

Comorbidity With Stimulant Misuse. The aggregate data from studies reported above seem to suggest that individuals who misuse stimulants may have other psychiatric disorders such as conduct disorder (CD) 36 and/or SA. 21,29,31,36,37 The vast majority of studies have shown a high rate of misuse of stimulant medications in the context of alcohol, marijuana, or other drugs. For instance, McCabe et al. 21,29 have shown in a series of survey studies that MPH misuse typically occurs in the context of misuse of other substances and in those with a history of poly-SA. Similarly, Poulin 23 reported higher risk for stimulant misuse in context to cigarette, alcohol, and cannabis use in junior and high school students. In a smaller study using direct contact, 32 there were similar results, indicating misuse of stimulants in context to polysubstance misuse and abuse. Kroutil et al. 34 did not report on other SA but did note that approximately 13% of nonmethamphetamine nonmedical stimulant users also met DSM criteria for abuse or dependence of stimulants. Likewise, this group found that there was substantial misuse of methamphetamine in those who also used ADHD stimulants nonmedically. In our sample, we found that CD and SA were common among ADHD subjects who diverted (83% had CD and 83% had SA) or misused (75% had SA and 58% had CD).

Hence, it appears that ADHD individuals without substantial psychiatric comorbidities or SA generally use their medication appropriately. In individuals with ADHD, the misuse and diversion of stimulant medication seem to occur most commonly in those individuals with co-occurring CD and SA. Although the details and context of the inappropriate stimulant misuse remains unclear, it is well known that CD predicts a more pernicious outcome in ADHD, often resulting in comorbid antisocial disorder in adulthood. 43

## DISCUSSION

The results of our systematic evaluation of the literature appears to suggest that despite the welldocumented safety profile of the stimulants used in the treatment of ADHD, 10,11 consistent evidence of misuse of stimulants in older adolescent and college-age students with and without ADHD exists. 20,23,25,26,29,36,37,44 Y 46 Minimal literature exists on the diversion of medication from those with ADHD to others. 23,36 There is a higher risk for stimulant misuse and diversion in individuals with SA or CD. Stimulant misuse appears to occur both for performance enhancement and their euphorogenic effects, the latter being related to the intrinsic properties of the stimulants (e.g., IR versus ER profile).

The results of our literature search indicate that the misuse and diversion of prescription ADHD medications occur, with from as low as 5% to as high as 35% reporting stimulant misuse, especially prevalent among older adolescents and college-age populations. Methodologically, whereas the larger survey studies typically result in smaller rates of stimulant misuse, smaller, single-site studies often with face-to-face interviews report higher risk. For example, the highest rate (35%) of stimulant misuse was based on a small single-site study ( N = 150) compared to larger multisite studies ( N = 10,904 students from 119 colleges) that reported substantially lower misuse rates, both lifetime (6.9%) and past year (4.1%). 29 The context of stimulant misuse is evolving, with recent work shedding important light on this area. Of particular interest is the issue of motivation to misuse stimulants. For instance, it is unclear whether those who misuse and divert are B selfmedicating [ latent ADHD or underlying neuropsychological difficulties. The most commonly reported reasons for use of nonprescribed stimulants include studying, staying awake, improved alertness, B getting high [ / B partying, [ and experimenting. 32,33,38,41 These motivations have been conceptualized in the larger categories of recreational and academic misuse. Along those lines, recent signals have emerged suggesting that the competitiveness of the college environment, 28 preparation, and other drug use 33 mayserve as predictors of which groups are more likely to misuse. It also remains unclear whether subjects with neuropsychological deficits or latent ADHD symptoms may be more vulnerable to misuse stimulants preferentially. 23,37 In support of this notion, the Upadayha et al. 37 study found an association with stimulant misuse and current ADHD symptoms. Similarly, one survey study in junior and senior high school students found an almost fivefold relative risk for stimulant misuse associated with a positive screen for ADHD. 23 Moreover, it may also be that similar vulnerabilities that predispose to SA may also result in stimulant misuse. Future studies should seek to evaluate what, if any, qualitative differences exist between individuals who use recreationally and those who use to enhance academic performance.

Inquiry into the relationship between social class, sex, race, and misuse also remains unanswered. The literature indicates that whites divert and misuse prescription medications more than any other racial group. 22,28,29 For instance, data from a single institu- tion 41 indicated that whites and Hispanics misused at a comparable rate and that rate was three times more than that of African Americans and two times more than that of Asian Americans. Information on the association between sex (gender) and stimulant misuse has been conflicting. Although some studies have failed to find sex differences in patterns of misuse, 20,33,38 other studies have suggested that there are differences in what predicates misuse 40 and reasons for misuse. 22 Further work is needed to determine the nature of the relationship between race, sex, socioeconomic status, and the misuse of prescription medications.

That IR may have more liability for misuse or diversion compared to ER stimulants in naturalistic samples parallels basic research. 47 For example, results of a cross-over study in 49 healthy adults administered 60 mg of IR MPH or 108 mg of OROS MPH orally 48 showed that subjects receiving the IR compared to the ER MPH preparation endorsed higher euphoria scores and higher visual analog drug liking scales. 48 Similarly, Spencer and colleagues 49 found differences in dopamine transporter uptake of an osmotic release ER MPH to equipotent IR MPH commensurate with slower uptake and longer association of the dopamine transporter, signaling less likeability and B feeling the drug [ as noted with ER versus IR MPH. Recent data also suggest that differences exist between a prodrug form of d-AMPH (lisdexamfetamine) that has ER properties compared to IR d-AMPH. 50 Lower ratings of likeability and potential misuse by intranasal and intravenous administration have been reported. 50

Differences in the pharmacokinetics and euphorogenic properties of MPH exist for oral, 51 intranasal, 52 and intravenous administration. 47,53 Given the difficulties in extracting MPH or AMPH from transdermal, prodrug, or beaded and osmotic ER preparations, these stimulant formulations may be less frequently misused and abused than IR forms. Not only does a prodrug or the osmotic/beaded system diminish the extraction of the active compound, but the mechanisms of release may translate into different effects at the dopamine transporter, 49 the major receptor affected by this class of agents. 54 Y 56

There appears to be both clinical and public health relevance to the findings from this systematic review of the literature. Given the consistent findings of misuse of stimulants (either illicit stimulant use or misuse in whom they are prescribed), educators, practitioners,

and others working in junior and senior high schools and colleges including study skills centers, health care centers, and so forth need to be made aware of the scope and context of the problem and to develop prevention and monitoring programs for prescription drug misuse and diversion. Clinicians should advise students of the potential for serious adverse outcomes when misusing these drugs in unmonitored situations (e.g., cardiovascular), recreationally or through various routes of administration, as well as the potential legal consequences of misuse or diversion. It also seems prudent to educate individuals with ADHD for whom stimulants are prescribed in the safe storage of the medication and problems with medication diversion. In addition, the use of nonstimulants or ER or prodrug stimulants is preferred in older high school and college students and particularly in individuals with known CDor SA at highest risk for diverting or misusing their medication. Individuals identified with stimulant misuse should be evaluated for SA and other potential problems as well as educated as to the pitfalls of misuse and diversion of stimulants. Students suspected of misusing stimulants for cognitive improvement that manifest symptoms of ADHD or learning disabilities may benefit from further evaluation. Although it remains to be shown, the identification and B optimal [ treatment of high school and college students with ADHD may result in lower misuse and diversion of stimulants.

In summary, the available literature suggests that consistent misuse and diversion of the stimulants is occurring in adolescent and young adult samples often in the context of academic performance and SA and is often linked with academic performance or their euphoric properties. Evidence of the misuse of stimulants to improve concentration and performance as well as a relationship with undiagnosed ADHD seems to exist (particularly in college-age youths); however, it is unclear how many of the subset of individuals who misuse stimulants actually have neuropsychological deficits or untreated ADHD, and the subsequent effects of treating ADHD on later stimulant misuse. The extant literature is limited by variable methodology, terminology, and outcome measures as well as the lack of separation between single B use [ and multiple uses (e.g., frequency). As more studies using standardized methodology and outcome variables become available, metaanalytic techniques will assist in providing overall rates of stimulant diversion, misuse, and illicit use, as well as quantifiable predictors and correlates. Studies further assessing individuals at risk and the context of misuse will help in the prevention and early identification of individuals who misuse stimulants. Data on the optimal treatment of individuals with ADHD and ultimate risk for misuse and diversion of stimulants are necessary.

Disclosure: Dr. Wilens has received research support from, has been a speaker for and served on the advisory boards of Abbott, Ortho-McNeil, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Neurosearch, Novartis, Pfizer, and Shire. Dr. Adler receives and has received research support from, is and has been a speaker for, or is and has been on the advisory boards of Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cephalon, Cortex, Eli Lilly, National Institute of Drug Abuse, Neurosearch, Novartis, McNeil/J &amp; J, Merck, Organon, Pfizer, and Shire. The other authors report no conflicts of interest.

## REFERENCES

1. Faraone SV, Sergeant J, Gillberg C, et al. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: is it an American condition? World Psychiatry. 2003;2: 104 Y 113.
2. Kessler RC, Adler L, Barkley R, et al. The prevalence and correlates of adult ADHD in the United States: results from the national comorbidity survey replication. Am J Psychiatry . 2006;163:716 Y 723.
3. Polanczyk G, de Lima MS, Horta BL, et al. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression analysis. Am J Psychiatry . 2007;164:942 Y 948.
4. Goldman L, Genel M, Bezman RJ, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. JAMA . 1998;279:1100 Y 1107.
5. Abikoff H, Hechtman L, Klein RG, et al. Symptomatic improvement in children with ADHD treated with long-term methylphenidate and multimodal psychosocial treatment. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2004;43:802 Y 811.
6. MTA Cooperative Group. Moderators and mediators of treatment response for children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: the multimodal treatment study of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1999;56:1088 Y 1096.
7. MTA Cooperative Group. A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. The MTA Cooperative Group. Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1999;56:1073 Y 1086.
8. Pliszka S. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2007;46:894 Y 921.
9. Zametkin A, Ernst M. Problems in the management of attentiondeficit-hyperactivity disorder. N Engl J Med . 1999;340:40 Y 46.
10. Wilens TE, Spencer T. The stimulants revisited. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . 2000;9:573 Y 603.
11. Greenhill LL, Pliszka S, Dulcan MK, et al. Practice parameter for the use of stimulant medications in the treatment of children, adolescents, and adults. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2002;41:26S Y 49S.
12. Barkley RA. A review of stimulant drug research with hyperactive children. J Child Psychol Psychiatry . 1977;18:137 Y 165.
13. Greenhill L, Osman B. Ritalin: Theory and Practice . New York: Mary Ann Liebert Inc; 1999.
14. Gillberg C, Melander H, Knorring A, et al. Long-term stimulant treatment of children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1997;54:857 Y 864.
15. Anonymous. Mental health in the United States. Prevalence of

- diagnosis and medication treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder V United States, 2003. MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep . 2005;54:842 Y 847.
16. Vitiello B. Long-term effects of stimulant medications on the brain: possible relevance to the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol . 2001;11:25 Y 34.
17. Kollins SH, MacDonald EK, Cush CR. Assessing the abuse potential of methylphenidate in nonhuman and human subjects: a review. Pharmacol Biochem Behav . 2001;68:611 Y 627.
18. Jasinski DR, Faries D, Allen AJ. Abuse liability assessment of atomoxetine in a drug-abusing population. In: Scientific Proceedings of the American Psychiatric Association; New York; May 1 Y 6, 2004.
19. National Institute on Drug Abuse (2006), Prescription Pain and Other Medications.Availableat http://www.drugabuse.gov/infofacts/PainMed.html . Accessed July 18, 2006
20. Teter CJ, McCabe SE, Boyd CJ, et al. Illicit methylphenidate use in an undergraduate student sample: prevalence and risk factors. Pharmacotherapy . 2003;23:609 Y 617.
21. McCabe SE, Teter CJ, Boyd CJ. The use, misuse and diversion of prescription stimulants among middle and high school students. Subst Use Misuse . 2004;39:1095 Y 1116.
22. McCabe SE, Teter CJ, Boyd CJ. Medical use, illicit use, and diversion of abusable prescription drugs. J Am Coll Health . 2006;54:269 Y 278.
23. Poulin C. From attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder to medical stimulant use to the diversion of prescribed stimulants to non-medical stimulant use: connecting the dots. Addiction . 2007;102:740 Y 751.
24. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV) . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 1994.
25. Poulin C. Medical and nonmedical stimulant use among adolescents: from sanctioned to unsanctioned use. Can Med Assoc J . 2001;165: 1039 Y 1044.
26. Klein-Schwartz W, McGrath J. Poison centers \_ experience with methylphenidate abuse in pre-teens and adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2003;42:288 Y 294.
27. Marsh LD, Kay JD, Payne TP. Methylphenidate misuse in substance abusing adolescents. J Child Adolesc Subst Abuse . 2000;9:1 Y 14.
28. McCabe SE, Boyd CJ. Sources of prescription drugs for illicit use. Addict Behav . 2005;30:1342 Y 1350.
29. McCabe SE, Knight JR, Teter CJ, et al. Non-medical use of prescription stimulants among us college students: prevalence and correlates from a national survey. Addiction . 2005;99:96 Y 106.
30. Babcock Q, Byrne T. Student perceptions of methylphenidate abuse at a public liberal arts college. J Am Coll Health . 2000;49:143 Y 145.
31. Low KG, Gendaszek AE. Illicit use of psychostimulants among college students: a preliminary study. Psychol Health Med . 2002;7:283 Y 287.
32. Barrett SP, Darredeau C, Bordy LE, et al. Characteristics of methylphenidate misuse in a university student sample. Can J Psychiatry . 2005;50:457 Y 461.
33. White BP, Becker-Blease KA, Grace-Bishop K. Stimulant medication use, misuse, and abuse in an undergraduate and graduate student sample. J Am Coll Health . 2006;54:261 Y 268.
34. Kroutil LA, Van Brunt DL, Herman-Stahl MA, et al. Nonmedical use of prescription stimulants in the United States. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2006;84:135 Y 143.
35. Musser CJ, Ahmann PA, Theye FW, et al. Stimulant use and potential for abuse in Wisconsin as reported by school administrators and longitudinally followed children. J Dev Behav Pediatr . 1998;19: 187 Y 192.
36. Wilens T, Gignac M, Swezey A, et al. Characteristics of adolescents and young adults with ADHD who divert or misuse their prescribed medications. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2006;45:408 Y 414.
37. Upadhyaya HP, Rose K, Wang W, et al. Attention deficit hyperactivity
- disorder, medication treatment, and substance use patterns among adolescents and young adults. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol . 2005;15:799 Y 809.
38. Teter CJ, McCabe SE, Cranford JA, et al. Prevalence and motives for illicit use of prescription stimulants in an undergraduate student sample. J Am Coll Health . 2005;53:253 Y 262.
39. Wu LT, Schlenger WE. Psychostimulant dependence in a community sample. Subst Use Misuse . 2003;38:221 Y 248.
40. Hall KM, Irwin MM, Bowman KA, et al. Illicit use of prescribed stimulant medication among college students. J Am Coll Health . 2005; 53:167 Y 174.
41. Teter CJ, McCabe SE, LaGrange K, et al. Illicit use of specific prescription stimulants among college students: prevalence, motives, and routes of administration. Pharmacotherapy . 2006;26:1501 Y 1510.
42. Bright GM, Delphia B, Wildberger B. Survey evaluation of the abuse potential of prescription stimulants among patients with ADHD. Presented at the 160th Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association; San Diego; May 19 Y 24, 2007.
43. Mannuzza S, Klein RG, Bessler A, et al. Adult outcome of hyperactive boys: educational achievement, occupational rank, and psychiatric status. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1993;50:565 Y 576.
44. Jaffe SL. Intranasal abuse of prescribed methylphenidate by an alcohol and drug abusing adolescent with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1991;30:773 Y 775.
45. Garland JE. Intranasal abuse of prescribed methylphenidate. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1998;37:573 Y 574.
46. Drug Enforcement Administration. Methylphenidate Review Document . Washington, DC: Office of Diversion Control, Drug and Chemical Evaluation Section; 1995.
47. Volkow ND, Swanson JM. Variables that affect the clinical use and abuse of methylphenidate in the treatment of ADHD. Am J Psychiatry . 2003;160:1909 Y 1918.
48. Parasrampuria D, Schoedel K, Schuller R, et al. Abuse potential of Oros methylphenidate versus immediate-release methylphenidate and placebo. Presented at the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Joint Annual Meeting, Toronto; 2005.
49. Spencer T, Biederman J, Ciccone P, et al. A pet study examining pharmacokinetics, detection and likeability, and dopamine transporter receptor occupancy of short and long-acting orally administered formulations of methylphenidate in adults. Am J Psychiatry . 2006; 163:387 Y 395.
50. Jasinski J. Abuse liability studies of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (NRP104). Presented at the 68th Annual Meeting of the College on Problems of Drug Dependence; Scottsdale, AZ; June 17 Y 22, 2006.
51. Jasinski DR. An evaluation of the abuse potential of modafinil using methylphenidate as a reference. J Psychopharmacol . 2000;14:53 Y 60.
52. Stoops WW, Glaser PE, Rush CR. Reinforcing, subject-rated, and physiological effects of intranasal methylphenidate in humans: a doseresponse analysis. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2003;71:179 Y 186.
53. Markowitz JS, Straughn AB, Patrick KS. Advances in the pharmacotherapy of attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder: focus on methylphenidate formulations. Pharmacotherapy . 2003;23:1281 Y 1299.
54. Volkow ND, Ding Y, Fowler JS, et al. Is methylphenidate like cocaine? Studies on the pharmacokinetics and distribution in the human brain. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1995;52:456 Y 463.
55. Volkow N, Wang G, Fowler J, et al. Dopamine transporter occupancies in the human brain induced by therapeutic doses of oral methylphenidate. Am J Psychiatry . 1998;155:1325 Y 1331.
56. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, et al. Relationship between blockade of dopamine transporters by oral methylphenidate and the increases in extracellular dopamine: therapeutic implications. Synapse . 2002;43: 181 Y 187.